1900
THE WIZARD OF OZ
by L. Frank Baum
INTRODUCTION
Introduction.

FOLKLORE, LEGENDS, MYTHS AND FAIRY TALES have followed childhood
through the ages, for every healthy youngster has a wholesome and
instinctive love for stories fantastic, marvelous and manifestly
unreal. The winged fairies of Grimm and Andersen have brought more
happiness to childish hearts than all other human creations.
Yet the old time fairy tale, having served for generations, may
now be classed as "historical" in the children's library; for the time
has come for a series of newer "wonder tales" in which the stereotyped
genie, dwarf and fairy are eliminated, together with all the
horrible and blood-curdling incidents devised by their authors to
point a fearsome moral to each tale. Modern education includes
morality; therefore the modern child seeks only entertainment in its
wonder tales and gladly dispenses with all disagreeable incidents.
Having this thought in mind, the story of "The Wonderful Wizard of
Oz" was written solely to please children of today. It aspires to
being a modernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are
retained and the heartaches and nightmares are left out.

    L. FRANK BAUM.
Chicago, April, 1900.
CHAPTER ONE
The Cyclone

DOROTHY lived in the midst of the great Kansas prairies, with
Uncle Henry, who was a farmer, and Aunt Em, who was the farmer's wife.
Their house was small, for the lumber to build it had to be carried by
wagon many miles. There were four walls, a floor and a roof, which
made one room; and this room contained a rusty-looking cooking
stove, a cupboard for the dishes, a table, three or four chairs, and
the beds. Uncle Henry and Aunt Em had a big bed in one corner and
Dorothy a little bed in another corner. There was no garret at all,
and no cellar- except a small hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone
cellar, where the family could go in case one of those great
whirlwinds arose, mighty enough to crush any building in its path.
It was reached by a trap door in the middle of the floor, from which a
ladder led down into the small, dark hole.
When Dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could see
nothing but the great gray prairie on every side. Not a tree nor a
house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached to the edge
of the sky in all directions. The sun had baked the plowed land into a
gray mass, with little cracks running through it. Even the grass was
not green, for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades until
they were the same gray color to be seen everywhere. Once the house
had been painted, but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed
it away, and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else.
When Aunt Em came there to live she was a young, pretty wife. The
sun and wind had changed her, too. They had taken the sparkle from her
eyes and left them a sober gray; they had taken the red from her
cheeks and lips, and they were gray also. She was thin and gaunt,
and never smiled now. When Dorothy, who was an orphan, first came to
her, Aunt Em had been so startled by the child's laughter that she
would scream and press her hand upon her heart whenever Dorothy's
merry voice reached her ears; and she still looked at the little
girl with wonder that she could find anything to laugh at.
Uncle Henry never laughed. He worked hard from morning till night
and did not know what joy was. He was gray also, from his long beard
to his rough boots, and he looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke.
It was Toto that made Dorothy laugh, and saved her from growing as
gray as her other surroundings. Toto was not gray; he was a little
black dog, with long silky hair and small black eyes that twinkled
merrily on either side of his funny, wee nose. Toto played all day
long, and Dorothy played with him, and loved him dearly.
Today, however, they were not playing. Uncle Henry sat upon the
doorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer than
usual. Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms, and looked
at the sky too. Aunt Em was washing the dishes.
From the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and Uncle
Henry and Dorothy could see where the long grass bowed in waves before
the coming storm. There now came a sharp whistling in the air from the
south, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw ripples in
the grass coming from that direction also.
Suddenly Uncle Henry stood up.
"There's a cyclone coming, Em," he called to his wife. "I'll go look
after the stock." Then he ran toward the sheds where the cows and
horses were kept.
Aunt Em dropped her work and came to the door. One glance told her
of the danger close at hand.
"Quick, Dorothy!" she screamed. "Run for the cellar!"
Toto jumped out of Dorothy's arms and hid under the bed, and the
girl started to get him. Aunt Em, badly frightened, threw open the
trap door in the floor and climbed down the ladder into the small,
dark hole. Dorothy caught Toto at last and started to follow her aunt.
When she was halfway across the room there came a great shriek from
the wind, and the house shook so hard that she lost her footing and
sat down suddenly upon the floor.
Then a strange thing happened.
The house whirled around two or three times and rose slowly
through the air. Dorothy felt as if she were going up in a balloon.
The north and south winds met where the house stood, and made it the
exact center of the cyclone. In the middle of a cyclone the air is
generally still, but the great pressure of the wind on every side of
the house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at the very top
of the cyclone; and there it remained and was carried miles and
miles away as easily as you could carry a feather.
It was very dark, and the wind howled horribly around her, but
Dorothy found she was riding quite easily. After the first few
whirls around, and one other time when the house tipped badly, she
felt as if she were being rocked gently, like a baby in a cradle.
Toto did not like it. He ran about the room, now here, now there,
barking loudly; but Dorothy sat quite still on the floor and waited to
see what would happen.
Once Toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at first
the little girl thought she had lost him. But soon she saw one of
his ears sticking up through the hole, for the strong pressure of
the air was keeping him up so that he could not fall. She crept to the
hole, caught Toto by the ear, and dragged him into the room again,
afterward closing the trap door so that no more accidents could
happen.
Hour after hour passed away, and slowly Dorothy got over her fright;
but she felt quite lonely, and the wind shrieked so loudly all about
her that she nearly became deaf. At first she had wondered if she
would be dashed to pieces when the house fell again; but as the
hours passed and nothing terrible happened, she stopped worrying and
resolved to wait calmly and see what the future would bring. At last
she crawled over the swaying floor to her bed, and lay down upon it;
and Toto followed and lay down beside her.
In spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of the wind,
Dorothy soon closed her eyes and fell fast asleep.
CHAPTER TWO
The Council with the Munchkins

SHE was awakened by a shock, so sudden and severe that if Dorothy
had not been lying on the soft bed she might have been hurt. As it
was, the jar made her catch her breath and wonder what had happened;
and Toto put his cold little nose into her face and whined dismally.
Dorothy sat up and noticed that the house was not moving; nor was it
dark, for the bright sunshine came in at the window, flooding the
little room. She sprang from her bed and with Toto at her heels ran
and opened the door.
The little girl gave a cry of amazement and looked about her, her
eyes growing bigger and bigger at the wonderful sights she saw.
The cyclone had set the house down very gently- for a cyclone- in
the midst of a country of marvelous beauty. There were lovely
patches of greensward all about, with stately trees bearing rich and
luscious fruits. Banks of gorgeous flowers were on every hand, and
birds with rare and brilliant plumage sang and fluttered in the
trees and bushes. A little way off was a small brook, rushing and
sparkling along between green banks, and murmuring in a voice very
grateful to a little girl who had lived so long on the dry, gray
prairies.
While she stood looking eagerly at the strange and beautiful sights,
she noticed coming toward her a group of the queerest people she had
ever seen. They were not as big as the grown folk she had always
been used to; but neither were they very small. In fact, they seemed
about as tall as Dorothy, who was a well-grown child for her age,
although they were, so far as looks go, many years older.
Three were men and one a woman, and all were oddly dressed. They
wore round hats that rose to a small point a foot above their heads,
with little bells around the brims that tinkled sweetly as they moved.
The hats of the men were blue; the little woman's hat was white, and
she wore a white gown that hung in pleats from her shoulders. Over
it were sprinkled little stars that glistened in the sun like
diamonds. The men were dressed in blue, of the same shade as their
hats, and wore well-polished boots with a deep roll of blue at the
tops. The men, Dorothy thought, were about as old as Uncle Henry,
for two of them had beards. But the little woman was doubtless much
older. Her face was covered with wrinkles, her hair was nearly
white, and she walked rather stiffly.
When these people drew near the house where Dorothy was standing
in the doorway, they paused and whispered among themselves, as if
afraid to come farther. But the little old woman walked up to Dorothy,
made a low bow and said, in a sweet voice:
"You are welcome, most noble Sorceress, to the land of the
Munchkins. We are so grateful to you for having killed the Wicked
Witch of the East, and for setting our people free from bondage."
Dorothy listened to this speech with wonder. What could the little
woman possibly mean by calling her a sorceress, and saying she had
killed the Wicked Witch of the East? Dorothy was an innocent, harmless
little girl, who had been carried by a cyclone many miles from home;
and she had never killed anything in all her life.
But the little woman evidently expected her to answer; so Dorothy
said, with hesitation, "You are very kind, but there must be some
mistake. I have not killed anything."
"Your house did, anyway," replied the little old woman, with a
laugh, "and that is the same thing. See!" she continued, pointing to
the corner of the house. "There are her two toes, still sticking out
from under a block of wood."
Dorothy looked, and gave a little cry of fright. There, indeed, just
under the corner of the great beam the house rested on, two feet
were sticking out, shod in silver shoes with pointed toes.
"Oh dear! Oh dear!" cried Dorothy, clasping her hands together in
dismay. "The house must have fallen on her. Whatever shall we do?"
"There is nothing to be done," said the little woman calmly.
"But who was she?" asked Dorothy.
"She was the Wicked Witch of the East, as I said," answered the
little woman. "She has held all the Munchkins in bondage for many
years, making them slave for her night and day. Now they are all set
free, and are grateful to you for the favor."
"Who are the Munchkins?" inquired Dorothy.
"They are the people who live in this land of the East, where the
Wicked Witch ruled."
"Are you a Munchkin?" asked Dorothy.
"No, but I am their friend, although I live in the land of the
North. When they saw the Witch of the East was dead the Munchkins sent
a swift messenger to me, and I came at once. I am the Witch of the
North."
"Oh, gracious!" cried Dorothy. "Are you a real witch?"
"Yes, indeed," answered the little woman. "But I am a good witch,
and the people love me. I am not as powerful as the Wicked Witch was
who ruled here, or I should have set the people free myself."
"But I thought all witches were wicked," said the girl, who was half
frightened at facing a real witch. "Oh, no, that is a great mistake.
There were only four witches in all the Land of Oz, and two of them,
those who live in the North and the South, are good witches. I know
this is true, for I am one of them myself, and cannot be mistaken.
Those who dwelt in the East and the West were, indeed, wicked witches;
but now that you have killed one of them, there is but one Wicked
Witch in all the Land of Oz- the one who lives in the West."
"But," said Dorothy, after a moment's thought, "Aunt Em has told
me that the witches were all dead- years and years ago."
"Who is Aunt Em?" inquired the little old woman.
"She is my aunt who lives in Kansas, where I came from."
The Witch of the North seemed to think for a time, with her head
bowed and her eyes upon the ground. Then she looked up and said, "I do
not know where Kansas is, for I have never heard that country
mentioned before. But tell me, is it a civilized country?"
"Oh, yes," replied Dorothy.
"Then that accounts for it. In the civilized countries I believe
there are no witches left, nor wizards, nor sorceresses, nor
magicians. But, you see, the Land of Oz has never been civilized,
for we are cut off from all the rest of the world. Therefore we
still have witches and wizards amongst us."
"Who are the wizards?" asked Dorothy.
"Oz himself is the Great Wizard answered the Witch, sinking her
voice to a whisper. "He is more powerful than all the rest of us
together. He lives in the City of Emeralds."
Dorothy was going to ask another question, but just then the
Munchkins, who had been standing silently by, gave a loud shout and
pointed to the corner of the house where the Wicked Witch had been
lying.
"What is it?" asked the little old woman, and looked, and began to
laugh. The feet of the dead Witch had disappeared entirely, and
nothing was left but the silver shoes.
"She was so old," explained the Witch of the North, that she dried
up quickly in the sun. That is the end of her. But the silver shoes
are yours, and you shall have them to wear." She reached down and
picked up the shoes, and after shaking the dust out of them handed
them to Dorothy.
"The Witch of the East was proud of those silver shoes," said one of
the Munchkins, "and there is some charm connected with them; but
what it is we never knew."
Dorothy carried the shoes into the house and placed them on the
table. Then she came out again to the Munchkins and said:
"I am anxious to get back to my aunt and uncle, for I am sure they
will worry about me. Can you help me find my way?"
The Munchkins and the Witch first looked at one another, and then at
Dorothy, and then shook their heads.
"At the East, not far from here," said one, "there is a great
desert, and none could live to cross it."
"It is the same at the South," said another, "for I have been
there and seen it. The South is the country of the Quadlings."
"I am told," said the third man, "that it is the same at the West.
And that country, where the Winkies live, is ruled by the Wicked Witch
of the West, who would make you her slave if you passed her way."
"The North is my home," said the old lady, "and at its edge is the
same great desert that surrounds this Land of Oz. I'm afraid, my dear,
you will have to live with us."
Dorothy began to sob at this, for she felt lonely among all these
strange people. Her tears seemed to grieve the kind-hearted Munchkins,
for they immediately took out their handkerchiefs and began to weep
also. As for the little old woman, she took off her cap and balanced
the point on the end of her nose, while she counted "One, two,
three" in a solemn voice. At once the cap changed to a slate, on which
was written in big, white chalk marks:

LET DOROTHY GO TO THE CITY OF EMERALDS

The little old woman took the slate from her nose, and having read
the words on it, asked, "Is your name Dorothy, my dear?"
"Yes," answered the child, looking up and drying her tears.
"Then you must go to the City of Emeralds. Perhaps Oz will help
you."
"Where is this city?" asked Dorothy.
"It is exactly in the center of the country, and is ruled by Oz, the
Great Wizard I told you of."
"Is he a good man?" inquired the girl anxiously.
"He is a good Wizard. Whether he is a man or not I cannot tell,
for I have never seen him."
"How can I get there?" asked Dorothy.
"You must walk. It is a long journey, through a country that is
sometimes pleasant and sometimes dark and terrible. However, I will
use all the magic arts I know of to keep you from harm."
"Won't you go with me?" pleaded the girl, who had begun to look upon
the little old woman as her only friend.
"No, I cannot do that," she replied, "but I will give you my kiss,
and no one will dare injure a person who has been kissed by the
Witch of the North."
She came close to Dorothy and kissed her gently on the forehead.
Where her lips touched the girl they left a round, shining mark, as
Dorothy found out soon after.
"The road to the City of Emeralds is paved with yellow brick,"
said the Witch, "so you cannot miss it. When you get to Oz do not be
afraid of him, but tell your story and ask him to help you. Good-by,
my dear."
The three Munchkins bowed low to her and wished her a pleasant
journey, after which they walked away through the trees. The Witch
gave Dorothy a friendly little nod, whirled around on her left heel
three times, and straightway disappeared, much to the surprise of
little Toto, who barked after her loudly enough when she had gone,
because he had been afraid even to growl while she stood by.
But Dorothy, knowing her to be a witch, had expected her to
disappear in just that way, and was not surprised in the least.
CHAPTER THREE
How Dorothy Saved the Scarecrow

WHEN Dorothy was left alone she began to feel hungry. So she went to
the cupboard and cut herself some bread, which she spread with butter.
She gave some to Toto, and taking a pail from the shelf she carried it
down to the little brook and filled it with clear, sparkling water.
Toto ran over to the trees and began to bark at the birds sitting
there. Dorothy went to get him, and saw such delicious fruit hanging
from the branches that she gathered some of it, finding it just what
she wanted to help out her breakfast.
Then she went back to the house, and having helped herself and
Toto to a good drink of the cool, clear water, she set about making
ready for the journey to the City of Emeralds.
Dorothy had only one other dress, but that happened to be clean
and was hanging on a peg beside her bed. It was gingham, with checks
of white and blue; and although the blue was somewhat faded with
many washings, it was still a pretty frock. The girl washed herself
carefully, dressed herself in the clean gingham, and tied her pink
sunbonnet on her head. She took a little basket and filled it with
bread from the cupboard, laying a white cloth over the top. Then she
looked down at her feet and noticed how old and worn her shoes were.
"They surely will never do for a long journey, Toto," she said.
And Toto looked up into her face with his little black eyes and wagged
his tail to show he knew what she meant.
At that moment Dorothy saw lying on the table the silver shoes
that had belonged to the Witch of the East.
"I wonder if they will fit me," she said to Toto. "They would be
just the thing to take a long walk in, for they could not wear out."
She took off her old leather shoes and tried on the silver ones,
which fitted her as well as if they had been made for her.
Finally she picked up her basket.
"Come along, Toto," she said. "We will go to the Emerald City and
ask the Great Oz how to get back to Kansas again."
She closed the door, locked it, and put the key carefully in the
pocket of her dress. And so, with Toto trotting along soberly behind
her, she started on her journey.
There were several roads near by, but it did not take her long to
find the one paved with yellow brick. Within a short time she was
walking briskly toward the Emerald City, her silver shoes tinkling
merrily on the hard, yellow roadbed. The sun shone bright and the
birds sang sweetly, and Dorothy did not feel nearly so bad as you
might think a little girl would who had been suddenly whisked away
from her own country and set down in the midst of a strange land.
She was surprised, as she walked along, to see how pretty the
country was about her. There were neat fences at the sides of the
road, painted a dainty blue color, and beyond them were fields of
grain and vegetables in abundance. Evidently the Munchkins were good
farmers and able to raise large crops. Once in a while she would
pass a house, and the people came out to look at her and bow low as
she went by; for everyone knew she had been the means of destroying
the Wicked Witch and setting them free from bondage. The houses of the
Munchkins were odd-looking dwellings. Each, was round, with a big dome
for a roof. All were painted blue, for in this country of the East
blue was the favorite color.
Toward evening, when Dorothy was tired with her long walk and
began to wonder where she should pass the night, she came to a house
rather larger than the rest. On the green lawn before it many men
and women were dancing. Five little fiddlers played as loudly as
possible, and the people were laughing and singing, while a big
table near by was loaded with delicious fruits and nuts, pies and
cakes, and many other good things to eat.
The people greeted Dorothy kindly, and invited her to supper and
to pass the night with them; for this was the home of one of the
richest Munchkins in the land, and his friends were gathered with
him to celebrate their freedom from the bondage of the Wicked Witch.
Dorothy ate a hearty supper and was waited upon by the rich Munchkin
himself, whose name was Boq. Then she sat upon a settee and watched
the people dance.
When Boq saw her silver shoes he said, "You must be a great
sorceress."
"Why?" asked the girl.
"Because you wear silver shoes and have killed the Wicked Witch.
Besides, you have white in your frock, and only witches and
sorceresses wear white."
"My dress is blue and white checked," said Dorothy, smoothing out
the wrinkles in it.
"It is kind of you to wear that," said Boq. "Blue is the color of
the Munchkins, and white is the witch color. So we know you are a
friendly witch."
Dorothy did not know what to say to this, for all the people
seemed to think her a witch, and she knew very well she was only an
ordinary little girl who had come by the chance of a cyclone into a
strange land.
When she had tired watching the dancing, Boq led her into the house,
where he gave her a room with a pretty bed in it. The sheets were made
of blue cloth, and Dorothy slept soundly in them till morning, with
Toto curled up on the blue rug beside her.
She ate a hearty breakfast, and watched a wee Munchkin baby, who
played with Toto and pulled his tail and crowed and laughed in a way
that greatly amused Dorothy. Toto was a fine curiosity to all the
people, for they had never seen a dog before.
"How far is it to the Emerald City?" the girl asked.
"I do not know," answered Boq gravely, "for I have never been there.
It is better for people to keep away from Oz, unless they have
business with him. But it is a long way to the Emerald City, and it
will take you many days. The country here is rich and pleasant, but
you must pass through rough and dangerous places before you reach
the end of your journey."
This worried Dorothy a little, but she knew that only the Great Oz
could help her get to Kansas again, so she bravely resolved not to
turn back.
She bade her friends good-by, and again started along the road of
yellow brick. When she had gone several miles she thought she would
stop to rest, and so climbed to the top of the fence beside the road
and sat down. There was a great cornfield beyond the fence, and not
far away she saw a Scarecrow, placed high on a pole to keep the
birds from the ripe corn.
Dorothy leaned her chin upon her hand and gazed thoughtfully at
the Scarecrow. Its head was a small sack stuffed with straw, with
eyes, nose, and mouth painted on it to represent a face. An old,
pointed blue hat, that had belonged to some Munchkin, was perched on
his head, and the rest of the figure was a blue suit of clothes,
worn and faded, which had also been stuffed with straw. On the feet
were some old boots with blue tops, such as every man wore in this
country, and the figure was raised above the stalks of corn by means
of the pole stuck up its back.
While Dorothy was looking earnestly into the queer, painted face
of the Scarecrow, she was surprised to see one of the eyes slowly wink
at her. She thought she must have been mistaken at first, for none
of the scarecrows in Kansas ever wink; but presently the figure nodded
its head to her in a friendly way. Then she climbed down from the
fence and walked up to it, while Toto ran around the pole and barked.
"Good day," said the Scarecrow, in a rather husky voice.
"Did you speak?" asked the girl, in wonder.
"Certainly," answered the Scarecrow. "How do you do?"
"I'm pretty well, thank you," replied Dorothy politely. "How do
you do?"
"I'm not feeling well," said the Scarecrow, with a smile, "for it is
very tedious being perched up here night and day to scare away crows."
"Can't you get down?" asked Dorothy.
"No, for this pole is stuck up my back. If you will please take away
the pole I shall be greatly obliged to you."
Dorothy reached up both arms and lifted the figure off the pole,
for- being stuffed with straw- it was quite light.
"Thank you very much." said the Scarecrow, when he had been set down
on the ground. "I feel like a new man."
Dorothy was puzzled at this, for it sounded queer to hear a
stuffed man speak, and to see him bow and walk along beside her.
"Who are you?" asked the Scarecrow when he had stretched himself and
yawned. "And where are you going?"
"My name is Dorothy," said the girl, "and I am going to the
Emerald City, to ask the Great Oz to send me back to Kansas."
"Where is the Emerald City?" he inquired. "And who is Oz?"
"Why, don't you know?" she returned, in surprise.
"No, indeed. I don't know anything. You see, I am stuffed, so I have
no brains at all," he answered sadly.
"Oh," said Dorothy, "I'm awfully sorry for you."
"Do you think," he asked, "if I go to the Emerald City with you,
that Oz would give me some brains?"
"I cannot tell," she returned, "but you may come with me, if you
like. If Oz will not give you any brains you will be no worse off than
you are now."
"That is true," said the Scarecrow. "You see," he continued
confidentially, "I don't mind my legs and arms and body being stuffed,
because I cannot get hurt. If anyone treads on my toes or sticks a pin
into me, it doesn't matter, for I can't feel it. But I do not want
people to call me a fool, and if my head stays stuffed with straw
instead of with brains, as yours is, how am I ever to know anything?"
"I understand how you feel," said the little girl, who was truly
sorry for him. "If you will come with me I'll ask Oz to do all he
can for you."
"Thank you," he answered gratefully.
They walked back to the road. Dorothy helped him over the fence, and
they started along the path of yellow brick for the Emerald City.
Toto did not like this addition to the party at first. He smelled
around the stuffed man as if he suspected there might be a nest of
rats in the straw, and he often growled in an unfriendly way at the
Scarecrow.
"Don't mind Toto," said Dorothy to her new friend. "He never bites."
"Oh, I'm not afraid," replied the Scarecrow. "He can't hurt the
straw. Do let me carry that basket for you. I shall not mind it, for I
can't get tired. I'll tell you a secret," he continued, as he walked
along. "There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of."
"What is that?" asked Dorothy. "The Munchkin farmer who made you?"
"No," answered the Scarecrow. "It's a lighted match."
CHAPTER FOUR
The Road Through the Forest

AFTER a few hours the road began to be rough, and the walking grew
so difficult that the Scarecrow often stumbled over the yellow bricks,
which were here very uneven. Sometimes, indeed, they were broken or
missing altogether, leaving holes that Toto jumped across and
Dorothy walked around. As for the Scarecrow, having no brains, he
walked straight ahead, and so stepped into the holes and fell at
full length on the hard bricks. It never hurt him, however, and
Dorothy would pick him up and set him upon his feet again, while he
joined her in laughing merrily at his own mishap.
The farms were not nearly so well cared for here as they were
farther back. There were fewer houses and fewer fruit trees, and the
farther they went the more dismal and lonesome the country became.
At noon they sat down by the roadside, near a little brook, and
Dorothy opened her basket and got out some bread. She offered a
piece to the Scarecrow, but he refused.
"I am never hungry," he said, "and it is a lucky thing I am not, for
my mouth is only painted. If I should cut a hole in it so I could eat,
the straw I am stuffed with would come out, and that would spoil the
shape of my head."
Dorothy saw at once that this was true, so she only nodded and
went on eating her bread.
"Tell me something about yourself and the country you came from,"
said the Scarecrow, when she had finished her dinner. So she told
him all about Kansas, and how gray everything was there, and how the
cyclone had carried her to this queer Land of Oz.
The Scarecrow listened carefully, and said, "I cannot understand why
you should wish to leave this beautiful country and go back to the
dry, gray place you call Kansas."
"That is because you have no brains" answered the girl. "No matter
how dreary and gray our homes are, we people of flesh and blood
would rather live there than in any other country, be it ever so
beautiful. There is no place like home."
The Scarecrow sighed.
"Of course I cannot understand it," he said. "If your heads were
stuffed with straw, like mine, you would probably all live in the
beautiful places, and then Kansas would have no people at all. It is
fortunate for Kansas that you have brains."
"Won't you tell me a story while we are resting?" asked the child.
The Scarecrow looked at her reproachfully, and answered:
"My life has been so short that I really know nothing whatever. I
was only made day before yesterday. What happened in the world
before that time is all unknown to me. Luckily, when the farmer made
my head, one of the first things he did was to paint my ears, so
that I heard what was going on. There was another Munchkin with him,
and the first thing I heard was the farmer saying, 'How do you like
those ears?'
"'They aren't straight,' answered the other.
"'Never mind,' said the farmer. 'They are ears just the same,' which
was true enough.
"'Now I'll make the eyes,' said the farmer. So he painted my right
eye, and as soon as it was finished I found myself looking at him
and at everything around me with a great deal of curiosity, for this
was my first glimpse of the world.
"'That's a rather pretty eye,' remarked the Munchkin who was
watching the farmer. 'Blue paint is just the color for eyes.'
"'I think I'll make the other a little bigger,' said the farmer. And
when the second eye was done I could see much better than before. Then
he made my nose and my mouth. But I did not speak, because at that
time I didn't know what a mouth was for. I had the fun of watching
them make my body and my arms and legs. And when they fastened on my
head, at last, I felt very proud, for I thought I was just as good a
man as anyone.
"'This fellow will scare the crows fast enough,' said the farmer.
'He looks just like a man.'
"'Why, he is a man,' said the other, and I quite agreed with him.
The farmer carried me under his arm to the cornfield, and set me up on
a tall stick, where you found me. He and his friend soon after
walked away and left me alone.
"I did not like to be deserted this way. So I tried to walk after
them. But my feet would not touch the ground, and I was forced to stay
on that pole. It was a lonely life to lead, for I had nothing to think
of, having been made such a little while before. Many crows and
other birds flew into the cornfield, but as soon as they saw me they
flew away again, thinking I was a Munchkin; and this pleased me and
made me feel that I was quite an important person. By and by an old
crow flew near me, and after looking at me carefully he perched upon
my shoulder and said:
"'I wonder if that farmer thought to fool me in this clumsy
manner. Any crow of sense could see that you are only stuffed with
straw.' Then he hopped down at my feet and ate all the corn he wanted.
The other birds, seeing he was not harmed by me, came to eat the
corn too, so in a short time there was a great flock of them about me.
"I felt sad at this, for it showed I was not such a good Scarecrow
after all; but the old crow comforted me, saying, 'If you only had
brains in your head you would be as good a man as any of them, and a
better man than some of them. Brains are the only things worth
having in this world, no matter whether one is a crow or a man.'
"After the crows had gone I thought this over, and decided I would
try hard to get some brains. By good luck you came along and pulled me
off the stake and from what you say I am sure the Great Oz will give
me brains as soon as we get to the Emerald City."
"I hope so," said Dorothy earnestly, "since you seem anxious to have
them."
"Oh, yes. I am anxious," returned the Scarecrow. "It is such an
uncomfortable feeling to know one is a fool."
"Well," said the girl, "let us go." And she handed the basket to the
Scarecrow.
There were no fences at all by the roadside now, and the land was
rough and untilled. Toward evening they came to a great forest,
where the trees grew so big and close together that their branches met
over the road of yellow brick. It was almost dark under the trees, for
the branches shut out the daylight; but the travelers did not stop,
and went on into the forest.
"If this road goes in, it must come out," said the Scarecrow, "and
as the Emerald City is at the other end of the road, we must go
wherever it leads us."
"Anyone would know that," said Dorothy.
"Certainly; that is why I know it," returned the Scarecrow. "If it
required brains to figure it out, I never should have said it."
After an hour or so the light faded away, and they found
themselves stumbling along in the darkness. Dorothy could not see at
all, but Toto could, for some dogs see very well in the dark; and
the Scarecrow declared he could see as well as by day. So she took
hold of his arm and managed to get along fairly well.
"If you see any house, or any place where we can pass the night,"
she said, "you must tell me; for it is very uncomfortable walking in
the dark."
Soon after the Scarecrow stopped.
"I see a little cottage at the right of us," he said, "built of logs
and branches. Shall we go there?"
"Yes, indeed," answered the child. "I am all tired out."
So the Scarecrow led her through the trees until they reached the
cottage, and Dorothy entered and found a bed of dried leaves in one
corner. She lay down at once, and with Toto beside her soon fell
into a sound sleep. The Scarecrow, who was never tired, stood up in
another corner and waited patiently until morning came.
CHAPTER FIVE
The Rescue of the Tin Woodman

WHEN Dorothy awoke the sun was shining through the trees and Toto
had long been out chasing birds around him. There was the Scarecrow,
still standing patiently in his corner, waiting for her.
"We must go and search for water," she said to him.
"Why do you want water?" he asked.
"To wash my face clean after the dust of the road, and to drink,
so the dry bread will not stick in my throat."
"It must be inconvenient to be made of flesh," said the Scarecrow
thoughtfully, "for you must sleep and eat and drink. However, you have
brains, and it is worth a lot of bother to be able to think properly."
They left the cottage and walked through the trees until they
found a little spring of clear water, where Dorothy drank and bathed
and ate her breakfast. She saw there was not much bread left in the
basket, and the girl was thankful the Scarecrow did not have to eat
anything, for there was scarcely enough for herself and Toto for the
day.
When she had finished her meal, and was about to go back to the road
of yellow brick, she was startled to hear a deep groan near by.
"What was that?" she asked timidly.
"I cannot imagine," replied the Scarecrow. "But we can go and see."
Just then another groan reached their ears, and the sound seemed
to come from behind them. They turned and walked through the forest
a few steps, when Dorothy discovered something shining in a ray of
sunshine that fell between the trees. She ran to the place and then
stopped short, with a little cry of surprise.
One of the big trees had been partly chopped through, and standing
beside it, with an uplifted axe in his hands, was a man made
entirely of tin. His head and arms and legs were jointed upon his
body, but he stood perfectly motionless, as if he could not stir at
all.
Dorothy looked at him in amazement, and so did the Scarecrow,
while Toto barked sharply and made a snap at the tin legs, which
hurt his teeth.
"Did you groan?" asked Dorothy.
"Yes," answered the tin man, "I did. I've been groaning for more
than a year, and no one has ever heard me before or come to help me."
"What can I do for you?" she inquired softly, for she was moved by
the sad voice in which the man spoke.
"Get an oilcan and oil my joints," he answered. "They are rusted
so badly that I cannot move them at all. If I am well oiled I shall
soon be all right again. You will find an oilcan on a shelf in my
cottage."
Dorothy at once ran back to the cottage and found the oilcan, and
then she returned and asked anxiously, "Where are your joints?"
"Oil my neck, first," replied the Tin Woodman. So she oiled it,
and as it was quite badly rusted the Scarecrow took hold of the tin
head and moved it gently from side to side until it worked freely, and
then the man could turn it himself.
"Now oil the joints in my arms," he said. And Dorothy oiled them and
the Scarecrow bent them care fully until they were quite free from
rust and as good as new.
The Tin Woodman gave a sigh of satisfaction and lowered his axe,
which he leaned against the tree.
"This is a great comfort," he said. "I have been holding that axe in
the air ever since I rusted, and I'm glad to be able to put it down at
last. Now, if you will oil the joints of my legs, I shall be all right
once more."
So they oiled his legs until he could move them freely; and he
thanked them again and again for his release, for he seemed a very
polite creature, and very grateful.
"I might have stood there always if you had not come along," he
said; "so you have certainly saved my life. How did you happen to be
here?"
"We are on our way to the Emerald City to see the Great Oz," she
answered, "and we stopped at your cottage to pass the night."
"Why do you wish to see Oz?" he asked.
"I want him to send me back to Kansas, and the Scarecrow wants him
to put a few brains into his head," she replied.
The Tin Woodman appeared to think deeply for a moment. Then he said:
"Do you suppose Oz could give me a heart?"
"Why, I guess so," Dorothy answered. "It would be as easy as to give
the Scarecrow brains."
"True," the Tin Woodman returned. "So, if you will allow me to
join your party, I will also go to the Emerald City and ask Oz to help
me."
"Come along," said the Scarecrow heartily, and Dorothy added that
she would be pleased to have his company. So the Tin Woodman
shouldered his axe and they all passed through the forest until they
came to the road that was paved with yellow brick.
The Tin Woodman had asked Dorothy to put the oilcan in her basket.
"For," he said, "if I should get caught in the rain, and rust again, I
would need the oilcan badly."
It was a bit of good luck to have their new comrade join the
party, for soon after they had begun their journey again they came
to a place where the trees and branches grew so thick over the road
that the travelers could not pass. But the Tin Woodman set to work
with his axe and chopped so well that soon he cleared a passage for
the entire party.
Dorothy was thinking so earnestly as they walked along that she
did not notice when the Scarecrow stumbled into a hole and rolled over
to the side of the road. Indeed, he was obliged to call to her to help
him up again.
"Why didn't you walk around the hole?" asked the Tin Woodman.
"I don't know enough," replied the Scarecrow cheerfully. "My head is
stuffed with straw, you know, and that is why I am going to Oz to
ask him for some brains."
"Oh, I see," said the Tin Woodman. "But, after all, brains are not
the best things in the world."
"Have you any?" inquired the Scarecrow.
"No, my head is quite empty," answered the Woodman. "But once I
had brains, and a heart also. So, having tried them both, I should
much rather have a heart."
"And why is that?" asked the Scarecrow.
"I will tell you my story, and then you will know."
So, while they were walking through the forest, the Tin Woodman told
the following story:
"I was born the son of a woodman who chopped down trees in the
forest and sold the wood for a living. When I grew up I too became a
woodchopper, and after my father died I took care of my old mother
as long as she lived. Then I made up my mind that instead of living
alone I would marry, so that I might not become lonely.
"There was one of the Munchkin girls who was so beautiful that I
soon grew to love her with all my heart. She, on her part, promised to
marry me as soon as I could earn enough money to build a better
house for her. So I set to work harder than ever. But the girl lived
with an old woman who did not want her to marry any one, for she was
so lazy she wished the girl to remain with her and do the cooking
and the housework. So the old woman went to the Wicked Witch of the
East, and promised her two sheep and a cow if she would prevent the
marriage. Thereupon the Wicked Witch enchanted my axe, and when I
was chopping away at my best one day, for I was anxious to get the new
house and my wife as soon as possible, the axe slipped all at once and
cut off my left leg.
"This at first seemed a great misfortune, for I knew a one-legged
man could not do very well as a wood-chopper. So I went to a
tinsmith and had him make me a new leg out of tin. The leg worked very
well, once I was used to it. But my action angered the Wicked Witch of
the East, for she had promised the old woman I should not marry the
pretty Munchkin girl. When I began chopping again, my axe slipped
and cut off my right leg. Again I went to the tinner, and again he
made me a leg out of tin. After this the enchanted axe cut off my
arms, one after the other; but, nothing daunted, I had them replaced
with tin ones. The Wicked Witch then made the axe slip and cut off
my head, and at first I thought that was the end of me. But the tinner
happened to come along, and he made me a new head out of tin.
"I thought I had beaten the Wicked Witch then, and I worked harder
than ever; but I little knew how cruel my enemy could be. She
thought of a new way to kill my love for the beautiful Munchkin
maiden, and made my axe slip again, so that it cut right through my
body, splitting me into two halves. Once more the tinner came to my
help and made me a body of tin, fastening my tin arms and legs and
head to it, by means of joints, so that I could move around as well as
ever. But, alas! I had now no heart, so that I lost all my love for
the Munchkin girl, and did not care whether I married her or not. I
suppose she is still living with the old woman, waiting for me to come
after her.
"My body shone so brightly in the sun that I felt very proud of it
and it did not matter now if my axe slipped, for it could not cut
me. There was only one danger- that my joints would rust. But I kept
an oilcan in my cottage and took care to oil myself whenever I
needed it. However, there came a day when I forgot to do this, and,
being caught in a rainstorm, before I thought of the danger my
joints had rusted, and I was left to stand in the woods until you came
to help me. It was a terrible thing to undergo, but during the year
I stood there I had time to think that the greatest loss I had known
was the loss of my heart. While I was in love I was the happiest man
on earth; but no one can love who has not a heart, and so I am
resolved to ask Oz to give me one. If he does, I will go back to the
Munchkin maiden and marry her."
Both Dorothy and the Scarecrow had been greatly interested in the
story of the Tin Woodman, and now they knew why he was so anxious to
get a new heart.
"All the same," said the Scarecrow, "I shall ask for brains
instead of a heart; for a fool would not know what to do with a
heart if he had one."
"I shall take the heart," returned the Tin Woodman; "for brains do
not make one happy, and happiness is the best thing in the world."
Dorothy did not say anything, for she was puzzled to know which of
her two friends was right, and she decided if she could only get
back to Kansas and Aunt Em it did not matter so much whether the
Woodman had no brains and the Scarecrow no heart, or each got what
he wanted.
What worried her most was that the bread was nearly gone, and
another meal for herself and Toto would empty the basket. To be sure
neither the Woodman nor the Scarecrow ever ate anything, but she was
not made of tin nor straw, and could not live unless she was fed.
CHAPTER SIX
The Cowardly Lion

ALL this time Dorothy and her companions had been walking through
the thick woods. The road was still paved with yellow bricks, but
these were much covered by dried branches and dead leaves from the
trees, and the walking was not at all good.
There were few birds in this part of the forest, for birds love
the open country where there is plenty of sunshine. But now and then
there came a deep growl from some wild animal hidden among the
trees. These sounds made the little girl's heart beat fast, for she
did not know what made them; but Toto knew, and he walked close to
Dorothy's side, and did not even bark in return.
"How long will it be," the child asked of the Tin Woodman, "before
we are out of the forest?"
"I cannot tell," was the answer, "for I have never been to the
Emerald City. But my father went there once, when I was a boy, and
he said it was a long journey through a dangerous country, although
nearer to the city where Oz dwells the country is beautiful. But I
am not afraid so long as I have my oilcan, and nothing can hurt the
Scarecrow, while you bear upon your forehead the mark of the Good
Witch's kiss, and that will protect you from harm."
"But Toto!" said the girl anxiously. "What will protect him?"
"We must protect him ourselves if he is in danger," replied the
Tin Woodman.
Just as he spoke there came from the forest a terrible roar, and the
next moment a great Lion bounded into the road. With one blow of his
paw he sent the Scarecrow spinning over and over to the edge of the
road, and then he struck at the Tin Woodman with his sharp claws. But,
to the Lion's surprise, he could make no impression on the tin,
although the Woodman fell over in the road and lay still.
Little Toto, now that he had an enemy to face, ran barking toward
the Lion, and the great beast had opened his mouth to bite the dog,
when Dorothy, fearing Toto would be killed, and heedless of danger,
rushed forward and slapped the Lion upon his nose as hard as she
could, while she cried out:
"Don't you dare to bite Toto! You ought to be ashamed of yourself, a
big beast like you, to bite a poor little dog!"
"I didn't bite him," said the Lion, as he rubbed his nose with his
paw where Dorothy had hit it.
"No, but you tried to," she retorted. "You are nothing but a big
coward."
"I know it," said the Lion, hanging his head in shame. "I've
always known it. But how can I help it?"
"I don't know, I'm sure. To think of your striking a stuffed man,
like the poor Scarecrow!"
"Is he stuffed?" asked the Lion in surprise, as he watched her
pick up the Scarecrow and set him upon his feet, while she patted
him into shape again.
"Of course he's stuffed," replied Dorothy, who was still angry.
"That's why he went over so easily," remarked the Lion. "It
astonished me to see him whirl around so. Is the other one stuffed
also?"
"No," said Dorothy, "he's made of tin." And she helped the Woodman
up again.
"That's why he nearly blunted my claws," said the Lion. "When they
scratched against the tin it made a cold shiver run down my back. What
is that little animal you are so tender of?"
"He is my dog, Toto," answered Dorothy.
"Is he made of tin, or stuffed?" asked the Lion.
"Neither. He's a- a- a meat dog," said the girl.
"Oh! He's a curious animal and seems remarkably small, now that I
look at him. No one would think of biting such a little thing except a
coward like me," continued the Lion sadly.
"What makes you a coward?" asked Dorothy, looking at the great beast
in wonder, for he was as big as a small horse.
"It's a mystery," replied the Lion. "I suppose I was born that
way. All the other animals in the forest naturally expect me to be
brave, for the Lion is everywhere thought to be the King of Beasts.
I learned that if I roared very loudly every living thing was
frightened and got out of my way. Whenever I've met a man I've been
awfully scared. But I just roared at him, and he has always run away
as fast as he could go. If the elephants and the tigers and the
bears had ever tried to fight me, I should have run myself- I'm such a
coward; but just as soon as they hear me roar they all try to get away
from me, and of course I let them go."
"But that isn't right. The King of Beasts shouldn't be a coward,"
said the Scarecrow.
"I know it," returned the Lion, wiping a tear from his eye with
the tip of his paw. "It is my great sorrow, and makes my life very
unhappy. But whenever there is danger, my heart begins to beat fast."
"Perhaps you have heart disease," said the Tin Woodman.
"It may be," said the Lion.
"If you have," continued the Tin Woodman, "you ought to be glad, for
it proves you have a heart. For my part, I have no heart, so I
cannot have heart disease."
"Perhaps," said the Lion thoughtfully, "if I had no heart I should
not be a coward."
"Have you brains?" asked the Scarecrow.
"I suppose so. I've never looked to see," replied the Lion.
"I am going to the Great Oz to ask him to give me some," remarked
the Scarecrow, "for my head is stuffed with straw."
"And I am going to ask him to give me a heart," said the Woodman.
"And I am going to ask him to send Toto and me back to Kansas,"
added Dorothy.
"Do you think Oz could give me courage?" asked the Cowardly Lion.
"Just as easily as he could give me brains," said the Scarecrow.
"Or give me a heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"Or send me back to Kansas," said Dorothy.
"Then, if you don't mind, I'll go with you," said the Lion, "for
my life is simply unbearable without a bit of courage."
"You will be very welcome," answered Dorothy, "for you will help
to keep away the other wild beasts. It seems to me they must be more
cowardly than you are if they allow you to scare them so easily."
"They really are," said the Lion, "but that doesn't make me any
braver, and as long as I know myself to be a coward I shall be
unhappy."
So once more the little company set off upon the journey, the Lion
walking with stately strides at Dorothy's side. Toto did not approve
this new comrade at first, for he could not forget how nearly he had
been crushed between the Lion's great jaws. But after a time he became
more at ease, and presently Toto and the Cowardly Lion had grown to be
good friends.
During the rest of that day there was no other adventure to mar
the peace of their journey. Once, indeed, the Tin Woodman stepped upon
a beetle that was crawling along the road, and killed the poor
little thing. This made the Tin Woodman very unhappy, for he was
always careful not to hurt any living creature; and as he walked along
he wept several tears of sorrow and regret. These tears ran slowly
down his face and over the hinges of his jaw, and there they rusted.
When Dorothy presently asked him a question the Tin Woodman could
not open his mouth, for his jaws were tightly rusted together. He
became greatly frightened at this and made many motions to Dorothy
to relieve him, but she could not understand. The Lion was also
puzzled to know what was wrong. But the Scarecrow seized the oilcan
from Dorothy's basket and oiled the Woodman's jaws, so that after a
few moments he could talk as well as before.
"This will serve me a lesson," said he, "to look where I step. For
if I should kill another bug or beetle I should surely cry again,
and crying rusts my jaws so that I cannot speak."
Thereafter he walked very carefully, with his eyes on the road,
and when he saw a tiny ant toiling by he would step over it, so as not
to harm it. The Tin Woodman knew very well he had no heart, and
therefore he took great care never to be cruel or unkind to anything.
"You people with hearts," he said, "have something to guide you, and
need never do wrong; but I have no heart, and so I must be very
careful. When Oz gives me a heart, of course I needn't mind so much."
CHAPTER SEVEN
The Journey to the Great Oz

THEY were obliged to camp out that night under a large tree in the
forest, for there were no houses near. The tree made a good, thick
covering to protect them from the dew, and the Tin Woodman chopped a
great pile of wood with his axe, and Dorothy built a splendid fire
that warmed her and made her feel less lonely. She and Toto ate the
last of their bread, and now she did not know what they would do for
breakfast.
"If you wish," said the Lion, "I will go into the forest and kill
a deer for you. You can roast it by the fire, since your tastes are so
peculiar that you prefer cooked food, and then you will have a very
good breakfast."
"Don't! Please don't," begged the Tin Woodman. "I should certainly
weep if you killed a poor deer, and then my jaws would rust again."
But the Lion went away into the forest and found his own supper, and
no one ever knew what it was, for he didn't mention it. And the
Scarecrow found a tree full of nuts and filled Dorothy's basket with
them, so that she would not be hungry for a long time. She thought
this was very kind and thoughtful of the Scarecrow, but she laughed
heartily at the awkward way in which the poor creature picked up the
nuts. His padded hands were so clumsy and the nuts were so small
that he dropped almost as many as he put in the basket. But the
Scarecrow did not mind how long it took him to fill the basket, for it
enabled him to keep away from the fire, as he feared a spark might get
into his straw and burn him up. So he kept a good distance away from
the flames, and only came near to cover Dorothy with dry leaves when
she lay down to sleep. These kept her very snug and warm, and she
slept soundly until morning.
When it was daylight, the girl bathed her face in a little
rippling brook, and soon after they all started toward the Emerald
City.
This was to be an eventful day for the travelers. They had hardly
been walking an hour when they saw before them a great ditch that
crossed the road and divided the forest as far as they could see on
either side. It was a very wide ditch, and when they crept up to the
edge and looked into it they could see it was also very deep, and
there were many big, jagged rocks at the bottom. The sides were so
steep that none of them could climb down, and for a moment it seemed
that their journey must end.
"What shall we do?" asked Dorothy despairingly.
"I haven't the faintest idea," said the Tin Woodman, and the Lion
shook his shaggy mane and looked thoughtful.
But the Scarecrow said, "We cannot fly, that is certain. Neither can
we climb down into this great ditch. Therefore, if we cannot jump over
it, we must stop where we are."
"I think I could jump over it," said the Cowardly Lion, after
measuring the distance carefully in his mind.
"Then we are all right," answered the Scarecrow, "for you can
carry us all over on your back, one at a time."
"Well, I'll try it," said the Lion. "Who will go first?"
"I will," declared the Scarecrow, "for, if you found that you
could not jump over the gulf, Dorothy would be killed, or the Tin
Woodman badly dented on the rocks below. But if I am on your back it
will not matter so much, for the fall would not hurt me at all."
"I am terribly afraid of falling, myself," said the Cowardly Lion,
"but I suppose there is nothing to do but try it. So get on my back
and we will make the attempt."
The Scarecrow sat upon the Lion's back, and the big beast walked
to the edge of the gulf and crouched down.
"Why don't you run and jump?" asked the Scarecrow.
"Because that isn't the way we Lions do these things," he replied.
Then giving a great spring, he shot through the air and landed
safely on the other side. They were all greatly pleased to see how
easily he did it, and after the Scarecrow had got down from his back
the Lion sprang across the ditch again.
Dorothy thought she would go next. So she took Toto in her arms
and climbed on the Lion's back, holding tightly to his mane with one
hand. The next moment it seemed as if she were flying through the air;
and then, before she had time to think about it, she was safe on the
other side. The Lion went back a third time and got the Tin Woodman,
and then they all sat down for a few moments to give the beast a
chance to rest, for his great leaps had made his breath short, and
he panted like a big dog that has been running too long.
They found the forest very thick on this side, and it looked dark
and gloomy. After the Lion had rested they started along the road of
yellow brick, silently wondering, each in his own mind, if ever they
would come to the end of the woods and reach the bright sunshine
again. To add to their discomfort, they soon heard strange noises in
the depths of the forest, and the Lion whispered to them that it was
in this part of the country that the Kalidahs lived.
"What are the Kalidahs?" asked the girl.
"They are monstrous beasts with bodies like bears and heads like
tigers," replied the Lion, "and with claws so long and sharp that they
could tear me in two as easily as I could kill Toto. I'm terribly
afraid of the Kalidahs."
"I'm not surprised that you are," returned Dorothy. "They must be
dreadful beasts."
The Lion was about to reply when suddenly they came to another
gulf across the road. But this one was so broad and deep that the Lion
knew at once he could not leap across it.
So they sat down to consider what they should do, and after
serious thought the Scarecrow said, "Here is a great tree, standing
close to the ditch. If the Tin Woodman can chop it down, so that it
will fall to the other side, we can walk across it easily."
"That is a first-rate idea," said the Lion. "One would almost
suspect you had brains in your head, instead of straw."
The Woodman set to work at once, and so sharp was his axe that the
tree was soon chopped nearly through. Then the Lion put his strong
front legs against the tree and pushed with all his might, and
slowly the big tree tipped and fell with a crash across the ditch,
with its top branches on the other side.
They had just started to cross this queer bridge when a sharp
growl made them all look up, and to their horror they saw running
toward them two great beasts with bodies like bears and heads like
tigers.
"They are the Kalidahs!" said the Cowardly Lion, beginning to
tremble.
"Quick!" cried the Scarecrow. "Let us cross over."
So Dorothy went first, holding Toto in her arms, the Tin Woodman
followed, and the Scarecrow came next. The Lion, although he was
certainly afraid, turned to face the Kalidahs, and then he gave so
loud and terrible a roar that Dorothy screamed and the Scarecrow
fell over backward, while even the fierce beasts stopped short and
looked at him in surprise.
But, seeing they were bigger than the Lion, and remembering that
there were two of them and only one of him, the Kalidahs again
rushed forward, and the Lion crossed over the tree and turned to see
what they would do next. Without stopping an instant the fierce beasts
also began to cross the tree. And the Lion said to Dorothy, "We are
lost, for they will surely tear us to pieces with their sharp claws.
But stand close behind me, and I will fight them as long as I am
alive."
"Wait a minute!" called the Scarecrow. He had been thinking what was
best to be done, and now he asked the Woodman to chop away the end
of the tree that rested on their side of the ditch. The Tin Woodman
began to use his axe at once, and, just as the two Kalidahs were
nearly across, the tree fell with a crash into the gulf, carrying
the ugly, snarling brutes with it, and both were dashed to pieces on
the sharp rocks at the bottom.
"Well," said the Cowardly Lion, drawing a long breath of relief,
"I see we are going to live a little while longer, and I am glad of
it, for it must be a very uncomfortable thing not to be alive. Those
creatures frightened me so badly that my heart is beating yet."
"Ah," said the Tin Woodman sadly, "I wish I had a heart to beat."
This adventure made the travelers more anxious than ever to get
out of the forest, and they walked so fast that Dorothy became
tired, and had to ride on the Lion's back. To their great joy the
trees became thinner the farther they advanced, and in the afternoon
they suddenly came upon a broad river, flowing swiftly just before
them. On the other side of the water they could see the road of yellow
brick running through a beautiful country, with green meadows dotted
with bright flowers and all the road bordered with trees hanging
full of delicious fruits. They were greatly pleased to see this
delightful country before them.
"How shall we cross the river?" asked Dorothy.
"That is easily done," replied the Scarecrow. "The Tin Woodman
must build us a raft, so we can float to the other side."
So the Woodman took his axe and began to chop down small trees to
make a raft, and while he was busy at this the Scarecrow found on
the riverbank a tree full of fine fruit. This pleased Dorothy, who had
eaten nothing but nuts all day, and she made a hearty meal of the ripe
fruit.
But it takes time to make a raft, even when one is as industrious
and untiring as the Tin Woodman, and when night came the work was
not done. So they found a cozy place under the trees where they
slept well until the morning. And Dorothy dreamed of the Emerald City,
and of the good Wizard Oz, who would soon send her back to her own
home again.
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Deadly Poppy Field

OUR little party of travelers awakened the next morning refreshed
and full of hope, and Dorothy breakfasted like a princess off
peaches and plums from the trees beside the river. Behind them was the
dark forest they had passed safely through, although they had suffered
many discouragements. But before them was a lovely, sunny country that
seemed to beckon them on to the Emerald City.
To be sure, the broad river now cut them off from this beautiful
land. But the raft was nearly done, and after the Tin Woodman had
cut a few more logs and fastened them together with wooden pins,
they were ready to start. Dorothy sat down in the middle of the raft
and held Toto in her arms. When the Cowardly Lion stepped upon the
raft it tipped badly, for he was big and heavy; but the Scarecrow
and the Tin Woodman stood upon the other end to steady it, and they
had long poles in their hands to push the raft through the water.
They got along quite well at first, but when they reached the middle
of the river the swift current swept the raft downstream, farther
and farther away from the road of yellow brick. And the water grew
so deep that the long poles would not touch the bottom.
"This is bad," said the Tin Woodman, "for if we cannot get to the
land we shall be carried into the country of the Wicked Witch of the
West, and she will enchant us and make us her slaves."
"And then I should get no brains," said the Scarecrow.
"And I should get no courage," said the Cowardly Lion.
"And I should get no heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"And I should never get back to Kansas," said Dorothy.
"We must certainly get to the Emerald City if we can," the Scarecrow
continued, and he pushed so hard on his long pole that it stuck fast
in the mud at the bottom of the river. Then, before he could pull it
out again- or let go- the raft was swept away, and the poor
Scarecrow left clinging to the pole in the middle of the river.
"Good-by!" he called after them, and they were very sorry to leave
him. Indeed, the Tin Woodman began to cry, but fortunately
remembered that he might rust, and so dried his tears on Dorothy's
apron.
Of course this was a bad thing for the Scarecrow.
"I am now worse off than when I first met Dorothy," he thought.
"Then, I was stuck on a pole in a cornfield, where I could
make-believe scare the crows, at any rate. But surely there is no
use for a Scarecrow stuck on a pole in the middle of a river. I am
afraid I shall never have any brains, after all!"
Down the stream the raft floated, and the poor Scarecrow was left
far behind. Then the Lion said, "Something must be done to save us.
I think I can swim to the shore and pull the raft after me, if you
will only hold fast to the tip of my tail."
So he sprang into the water, and the Tin Woodman caught fast hold of
his tail. Then the Lion began to swim with all his might toward the
shore. It was hard work, although he was so big. But by and by they
were drawn out of the current, and then Dorothy took the Tin Woodman's
long pole and helped push the raft to the land.
They were all tired out when they reached the shore at last and
stepped off upon the pretty green grass, and they also knew that the
stream had carried them a long way past the road of yellow brick
that led to the Emerald City.
"What shall we do now?" asked the Tin Woodman, as the Lion lay
down on the grass to let the sun dry him.
"We must get back to the road, in some way," said Dorothy.
"The best plan will be to walk along the riverbank until we come
to the road again," remarked the Lion.
So, when they were rested, Dorothy picked up her basket and they
started along the grassy bank, back to the road from which the river
had carried them. It was a lovely country, with plenty of flowers
and fruit trees and sunshine to cheer them; and had they not felt so
sorry for the poor Scarecrow, they could have been very happy.
They walked along as fast as they could, Dorothy only stopping
once to pick a beautiful flower; and after a time the Tin Woodman
cried out, "Look!"
Then they all looked at the river and saw the Scarecrow perched upon
his pole in the middle of the water, looking very lonely and sad.
"What can we do to save him?" asked Dorothy.
The Lion and the Woodman both shook their heads, for they did not
know. So they sat down upon the bank and gazed wistfully at the
Scarecrow until a Stork flew by, who, upon seeing them, stopped to
rest at the water's edge.
"Who are you and where are you going?" asked the Stork.
"I am Dorothy," answered the girl, "and these are my friends, the
Tin Woodman and the Cowardly Lion. We are going to the Emerald City."
"This isn't the road," said the Stork, as she twisted her long
neck and looked sharply at the queer party.
"I know it," returned Dorothy, "but we have lost the Scarecrow,
and are wondering how we shall get him again."
"Where is he?" asked the Stork.
"Over there in the river," answered the little girl.
"If he weren't so big and heavy I would get him for you," remarked
the Stork.
"He isn't heavy a bit," said Dorothy eagerly, "for he is stuffed
with straw. If you will bring him back to us, we shall thank you
ever and ever so much."
"Well, I'll try," said the Stork. "But if I find he is too heavy
to carry I shall have to drop him in the river again."
So the big bird flew into the air and over the water till she came
to where the Scarecrow was perched upon his pole. Then the Stork
with her great claws grabbed the Scarecrow by the arm and carried
him up into the air and back to the bank, where Dorothy and the Lion
and the Tin Woodman and Toto were sitting.
When the Scarecrow found himself among his friends again, he was
so happy that he hugged them all, even the Lion and Toto. And as
they walked along he sang "Tol-de-ri-de-oh!" at every step, he felt so
gay.
"I was afraid I should have to stay in the river forever," he
said, "but the kind Stork saved me. If I ever get any brains I shall
find the Stork again and do her some kindness in return."
"That's all right," said the Stork, who was flying along beside
them. "I always like to help anyone in trouble. But I must go now, for
my babies are waiting in the nest for me. I hope you will find the
Emerald City and that Oz will help you."
"Thank you," replied Dorothy. Then the kind Stork flew into the
air and was soon out of sight.
They walked along listening to the singing of the brightly colored
birds and looking at the lovely flowers which now became so thick that
the ground was carpeted with them. There were big yellow and white and
blue and purple blossoms, besides great clusters of scarlet poppies,
which were so brilliant in color they almost dazzled Dorothy's eyes.
"Aren't they beautiful?" the girl asked, as she breathed in the
spicy scent of the bright flowers.
"I suppose so," answered the Scarecrow. "When I have brains, I shall
probably like them better."
"If I only had a heart, I should love them," added the Tin Woodman.
"I always did like flowers," said the Lion. "They of seem so
helpless and frail. But there are none in the forest so bright as
these."
They now came upon more and more of the big scarlet poppies, and
fewer and fewer of the other flowers. And soon they found themselves
in the midst of a great meadow of poppies. Now it is well known that
when there are many of these flowers together, their odor is so
powerful that anyone who breathes it falls asleep. And if the
sleeper is not carried away from the scent of the flowers, he sleeps
on and on forever. But Dorothy did not know this, nor could she get
away from the bright red flowers that were everywhere about. So
presently her eyes grew heavy and she felt she must sit down to rest
and to sleep.
But the Tin Woodman would not let her do this.
"We must hurry and get back to the road of yellow brick before
dark," he said, and the Scarecrow agreed with him. So they kept
walking until Dorothy could stand no longer. Her eyes closed in
spite of herself. Then she forgot where she was and fell among the
poppies, fast asleep.
"What shall we do?" asked the Tin Woodman.
"If we leave her here she will die," said the Lion. "The smell of
the flowers is killing us all. I myself can scarcely keep my eyes
open, and the dog is asleep already."
It was true. Toto had fallen down beside his little mistress. But
the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, not being made of flesh, were not
troubled by the scent of the flowers.
"Run fast," said the Scarecrow to the Lion. "Get out of this
deadly flower bed as soon as you can. We will bring the little girl
with us, but if you should fall asleep you are too big to be carried."
So the Lion aroused himself and bounded forward as fast as he
could go. In a moment he was out of sight.
"Let us make a chair with our hands and carry her," said the
Scarecrow. So they picked up Toto and put the dog in Dorothy's lap.
Then they made a chair with their hands for the seat and their arms
for the arms and carried the sleeping girl between them through the
flowers.
On and on they walked, and it seemed that the great carpet of deadly
flowers that surrounded them would never end. They followed the bend
of the river, and at last came upon their friend the Lion, lying
fast asleep among the poppies. The flowers had been too strong for the
huge beast and he had given up at last, falling only a short
distance from the end of the poppy bed, where the sweet grass spread
in beautiful green fields before them.
"We can do nothing for him," said the Tin Woodman sadly. "He is much
too heavy to lift. We must leave him here to sleep on forever, and
perhaps he will dream that he has found courage at last."
"I'm sorry," said the Scarecrow. "The Lion was a very good comrade
for one so cowardly. But let us go on."
They carried the sleeping Dorothy to a pretty spot beside the river,
far enough from the poppy field to prevent her breathing any more of
the poison of the flowers. Here they laid her gently on the soft grass
and waited for the fresh breeze to waken her.
CHAPTER NINE
The Queen of the Field Mice

"WE cannot be far from the road of yellow brick now," remarked the
Scarecrow, as he stood beside the girl, "for we have come nearly as
far as the river carried us away."
The Tin Woodman was about to reply when he heard a low growl, and
turning his head (which worked beautifully on hinges) he saw a strange
beast come bounding over the grass toward them. It was, indeed, a
great, yellow wildcat, and the Woodman thought it must be chasing
something, for its ears were lying close to its head and its mouth was
wide open, showing two rows of ugly teeth, while its red eyes glowed
like balls of fire. As it came nearer the Tin Woodman saw that running
before the beast was a little gray Field Mouse, and although he had no
heart he knew it was wrong for the wildcat to try to kill such a
pretty, harmless creature.
So the Woodman raised his axe, and as the wildcat ran by he gave
it a quick blow that cut the beast's head clean off from its body, and
it rolled over at his feet in two pieces.
The Field Mouse, now that it was freed from its enemy, stopped
short. Then coming slowly up to the Woodman it said, in a squeaky
little voice, "Oh, thank you! Thank you ever so much for saving my
life."
"Don't speak of it, I beg of you," replied the Woodman. "I have no
heart, you know, so I am careful to help all those who may need a
friend, even if it happens to be only a mouse."
"Only a mouse!" cried the little animal indignantly. "Why, I am a
Queen- the Queen of all the Field Mice!"
"Oh, indeed," said the Woodman, making a bow.
"Therefore you have done a great deed, as well as a brave one, in
saving my life," added the Queen.
At that moment several mice were seen running up as fast as their
little legs could carry them, and when they saw their Queen they
exclaimed:
"Oh, your Majesty, we thought you would be killed! How did you
manage to escape the great wildcat?" They all bowed so low to the
little Queen that they almost stood upon their heads.
"This funny tin man," she answered, "killed the wildcat and saved my
life. So hereafter you must all serve him and obey his slightest
wish."
"We will!" cried all the mice, in a shrill chorus. And then they
scampered in all directions, for Toto had awakened from his sleep, and
seeing all these mice around him he gave one bark of delight and
jumped right into the middle of the group. Toto had always loved to
chase mice when he lived in Kansas, and he saw no harm in it.
But the Tin Woodman caught the dog in his arms and held him tight,
while he called to the mice, "Come back! Come back! Toto shall not
hurt you."
At this the Queen of the Mice stuck her head out from underneath a
clump of grass and asked, in a timid voice, "Are you sure he will
not bite us?"
"I will not let him," said the Woodman. "So do not be afraid."
One by one the mice came creeping back, and Toto did not bark again,
although he tried to get out of the Woodman's arms, and would have
bitten him had he not known very well he was made of tin. Finally
one of the biggest mice spoke.
"Is there anything we can do," it asked, to repay you for saving the
life of our Queen?"
"Nothing that I know of," answered the Woodman. However, the
Scarecrow, who had been trying to think, but could not because his
head was stuffed with straw, said quickly, "Oh, yes! You can save
our friend, the Cowardly Lion, who is asleep in the poppy bed."
"A Lion!" cried the little Queen. "Why, he would eat us all up."
"Oh, no," declared the Scarecrow. "This Lion is a coward."
"Really?" asked the Mouse.
"He says so himself," answered the Scarecrow, "and he would never
hurt anyone who is our friend. If you will help us to save him I
promise that he shall treat you all with kindness."
"Very well," said the Queen, "we will trust you. But what shall we
do?"
"Are there many of these mice which call you Queen and are willing
to obey you?"
"Oh, yes. There are thousands," she replied.
"Then send for them all to come here as soon as possible, and let
each one bring a long piece of string."
The Queen turned to the mice that attended her and told them to go
at once and get all her people. As soon as they heard her orders
they ran away in every direction as fast as possible.
"Now," said the Scarecrow to the Tin Woodman, "you must go to
those trees by the riverside and make a truck that will carry the
Lion."
So the Woodman went at once to the trees and began to work. And he
soon made a truck out of the limbs of trees, from which he chopped
away all the leaves and branches. He fastened it together with
wooden pegs and made the four wheels out of short pieces of a big tree
trunk. So fast and so well did he work that by the time the mice began
to arrive the truck was all ready for them.
They came from all directions, and there were thousands of them- big
mice and little mice and middle-sized mice- and each one brought a
piece of string in his mouth. It was about this time that Dorothy woke
from her long sleep and opened her eyes. She was greatly astonished to
find herself lying upon the grass, with thousands of mice standing
around and looking at her timidly. But the Scarecrow told her about
everything.
Turning to the dignified little Mouse, he said, "Permit me to
introduce to you her Majesty, the Queen."
Dorothy nodded gravely and the Queen made a curtsy, after which
she became quite friendly with the little girl.
The Scarecrow and the Woodman now began to fasten the mice to the
truck, using the strings they had brought. One end of a string was
tied around the neck of each mouse and the other end to the truck.
Of course the truck was a thousand times bigger than any of the mice
who were to draw it. But when all the mice had been harnessed, they
were able to pull it quite easily. Even the Scarecrow and the Tin
Woodman could sit on it, and were drawn swiftly by their queer
little horses to the place where the Lion lay asleep.
After a great deal of hard work- for the Lion was heavy- they
managed to get him up on the truck. Then the Queen hurriedly gave
her people the order to start, for she feared if the mice stayed among
the poppies too long they also would fall asleep.
At first the little creatures, many though they were, could hardly
stir the heavily loaded truck; but the Woodman and the Scarecrow
both pushed from behind, and they got along better. Soon they rolled
the Lion out of the poppy bed to the green fields, where he could
breathe the sweet, fresh air again, instead of the poisonous scent
of the flowers.
Dorothy came to meet them and thanked the little mice warmly for
saving her companion from death. She had grown so fond of the big Lion
she was glad he had been rescued.
Then the mice were unharnessed from the truck and scampered away
through the grass to their homes. The Queen of the Mice was the last
to leave.
"If ever you need us again," she said, "come out into the field
and call, and we shall hear you and come to your assistance. Good-by!"
"Good-by!" they all answered, and away the Queen ran, while
Dorothy held Toto tightly lest he should run after her and frighten
her.
After this they sat down beside the Lion until he should awaken. And
the Scarecrow brought Dorothy some fruit from a tree near by, which
she ate for her dinner.
CHAPTER TEN
The Guardian of the Gates

IT WAS some time before the Cowardly Lion awakened, for he had
lain among the poppies a long while, breathing in their deadly
fragrance. When he did open his eyes and roll off the truck, he was
very glad to find himself still alive.
"I ran as fast as I could," he said, sitting down and yawning,
"but the flowers were too strong for me. How did you get me out?"
Then they told him of the field mice, and how they had generously
saved him from death; and the Cowardly Lion laughed.
"I have always thought myself very big and terrible. Yet such little
things as flowers came near to killing me, and such small animals as
mice have saved my life. How strange it all is! But, comrades, what
shall we do now?"
"We must journey on until we find the road of yellow brick again,"
said Dorothy. "Then we can keep on to the Emerald City."
So, the Lion being fully refreshed and feeling quite himself
again, they all started upon the journey. They so greatly enjoyed
the walk through the soft, fresh grass that it was not long before
they reached the road of yellow brick and turned again toward the
Emerald City where the Great Oz dwelt.
The road was smooth and well paved now, and the country about was
beautiful, so that the travelers rejoiced in leaving the forest far
behind, and with it the many dangers they had met in its gloomy
shades. Once more they could see fences built beside the road, but
these were painted green. When they came to a small house, in which
a farmer evidently lived, that also was painted green. They passed
by several of these houses during the afternoon. Sometimes people came
to the doors and looked at them as if they would like to ask
questions, but no one came near them nor spoke to them because they
were very much afraid of the great Lion. The people were all dressed
in clothing of a lovely emerald-green color and wore peaked hats
like those of the Munchkins.
"This must be the Land of Oz," said Dorothy, "and we are surely
getting near the Emerald City."
"Yes," answered the Scarecrow. "Everything is green here, while in
the country of the Munchkins blue was the favorite color. But the
people do not seem to be as friendly as the Munchkins, and I'm
afraid we shall be unable to find a place to pass the night."
"I should like something to eat besides fruit," said the girl,
"and I'm sure Toto is nearly starved. Let us stop at the next house
and talk to the people."
So, when they came to a good-sized farmhouse, Dorothy walked
boldly up to the door and knocked.
A woman opened it just far enough to look out, and said, "What do
you want, child, and why is that great Lion with you?"
"We wish to pass the night with you, if you will allow us," answered
Dorothy. "The Lion is my friend and comrade, and would not hurt you
for the world."
"Is he tame?" asked the woman, opening the door a little wider.
"Oh, yes," said the girl, "and he is a great coward, too. He will be
more afraid of you than you are of him."
"Well," said the woman, after thinking it over and taking another
peep at the Lion, "if that is the case you may come in, and I will
give you some supper and a place to sleep."
So they all entered the house, where there were, besides the
woman, two children and a man. The man had hurt his leg, and was lying
on the couch in a corner. They seemed greatly surprised to see so
strange a company.
While the woman was busy laying the table the man asked, "Where
are you all going?"
"To the Emerald City," said Dorothy, "to see the Great Oz."
"Oh, indeed!" exclaimed the man. "Are you sure that Oz will see
you?"
"Why not?" she replied.
"Why, it is said that he never lets anyone come into his presence. I
have been to the Emerald City many times, and it is a beautiful and
wonderful place; but I have never been permitted to see the Great
Oz, nor do I know of any living person who has seen him."
"Does he never go out?" asked the Scarecrow.
"Never. He sits day after day in the great Throne Room of his
palace, and even those who wait upon him do not see him face to face."
"What is he like?" asked the girl.
"That is hard to tell," said the man thoughtfully. "You see, Oz is a
Great Wizard, and can take on any form he wishes. So that some say
he looks like a bird; and some say he looks like an elephant; and some
say he looks like a cat. To others he appears as a beautiful fairy, or
a brownie, or in any other form that pleases him. But who the real
Oz is, when he is in his own form, no living person can tell."
"That is very strange," said Dorothy, "but we must try, in some way,
to see him, or we shall have made our journey for nothing."
"Why do you wish to see Oz?" asked the man.
"I want him to give me some brains," said the Scarecrow eagerly.
"Oh, Oz could do that easily enough," declared the man. "He has more
brains than he needs."
"And I want him to give me a heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"That will not trouble him," continued the man. "Oz has a large
collection of hearts, of all sizes and shapes."
"And I want him to give me courage," said the Cowardly Lion.
"Oz keeps a great pot of courage in his Throne Room," said the
man, "which he has covered with a golden plate, to keep it from
running over. He will be glad to give you some."
"And I want him to send me back to Kansas," said Dorothy.
"Where is Kansas?" asked the man, with surprise.
"I don't know," replied Dorothy sorrowfully, "but it is my home, and
I'm sure it's somewhere."
"Very likely. Well, Oz can do anything; so I suppose he will find
Kansas for you. But first you must get to see him, and that will be
a hard task; for the Great Wizard does not like to see anyone, and
he usually has his own way. But what do YOU want?" he continued,
speaking to Toto. Toto only wagged his tail, for, strange to say, he
could not speak.
The woman now called to them that supper was ready, so they gathered
around the table and Dorothy ate some delicious porridge and a dish of
scrambled eggs and a plate of nice white bread, and enjoyed her
meal. The Lion ate some of the porridge, but did not care for it,
saying it was made from oats and oats were food for horses- not for
lions. The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman ate nothing at all. Toto
ate a little of everything, and was glad to get a good supper again.
The woman now gave Dorothy a bed to sleep in, and Toto lay down
beside her, while the Lion guarded the door of her room so she might
not be disturbed. The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman stood up in a
corner and kept quiet all night, although of course they could not
sleep.
The next morning, as soon as the sun was up, they started on their
way, and soon saw a beautiful green glow in the sky just before them.
"That must be the Emerald City," said Dorothy.
As they walked on, the green glow became brighter and brighter,
and it seemed that at last they were nearing the end of their travels.
Yet it was afternoon before they came to the great wall that
surrounded the City. It was high and thick and of a bright green
color.
In front of them, and at the end of the road of yellow brick, was
a big gate, all studded with emeralds that glittered so in the sun
that even the painted eyes of the Scarecrow were dazzled by their
brilliancy.
There was a bell beside the gate, and Dorothy pushed the button
and heard a silvery tinkle sound within. Then the big gate swung
slowly open, and they all passed through and found themselves in a
high arched room, the walls of which glistened with countless
emeralds.
Before them stood a little man about the same size as the Munchkins.
He was clothed all in green, from his head to his feet, and even his
skin was of a greenish tint. At his side was a large green box.
When he saw Dorothy and her companions the man asked, "What do you
wish in the Emerald City?"
"We came here to see the Great Oz," said Dorothy.
The man was so surprised at this answer that he sat down to think it
over.
"It has been many years since anyone asked me to see Oz," he said,
shaking his head in perplexity. "He is powerful and terrible, and if
you come on an idle or foolish errand to bother the wise reflections
of the Great Wizard, he might be angry and destroy you all in an
instant."
"But it is not a foolish errand, nor an idle one," replied the
Scarecrow. "It is important. And we have been told that Oz is a good
Wizard."
"So he is," said the green man, "and he rules the Emerald City
wisely and well. But to those who are not honest, or who approach
him from curiosity, he is most terrible, and few have ever dared ask
to see his face. I am the Guardian of the Gates, and since you
demand to see the Great Oz I must take you to his palace. But first
you must put on the spectacles."
"Why?" asked Dorothy.
"Because if you did not wear spectacles the brightness and glory
of the Emerald City would blind you. Even those who live in the City
must wear spectacles night and day. They are all locked on, for Oz
so ordered it when the City was first built, and I have the only key
that will unlock them."
He opened the big box, and Dorothy saw that it was filled with
spectacles of every size and shape. All of them had green glasses in
them. The Guardian of the Gates found a pair that would just fit
Dorothy and put them over her eyes. There were two golden bands
fastened to them that passed around the back of her head, where they
were locked together by a little key that was at the end of a chain
the Guardian of the Gates wore around his neck. When they were on,
Dorothy could not take them off had she wished, but of course she
did not wish to be blinded by the glare of the Emerald City. So she
said nothing.
Then the green man fitted spectacles for the Scarecrow and the Tin
Woodman and the Lion, and even on little Toto. And all were locked
fast with the key.
Then the Guardian of the Gates put on his own glasses and told
them he was ready to show them to the palace. Taking a big golden
key from a peg on the wall, he opened another gate, and they all
followed him through the portal into the streets of the Emerald City.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
The Emerald City of Oz

EVEN with eyes protected by the green spectacles, Dorothy and her
friends were at first dazzled by the brilliancy of the wonderful City.
The streets were lined with beautiful houses all built of green marble
and studded everywhere with sparkling emeralds. They walked over a
pavement of the same green marble, and where the blocks were joined
together were rows of emeralds, set closely, and glittering in the
brightness of the sun. The windowpanes were of green glass. Even the
sky above the City had a green tint, and the rays of the sun were
green.
There were many people- men, women, and children- walking about, and
these were all dressed in green clothes and had greenish skins. They
looked at Dorothy and her strangely assorted company with wondering
eyes, and the children all ran away and hid behind their mothers
when they saw the Lion. But no one spoke to them. Many shops stood
in the street, and Dorothy saw that everything in them was green.
Green candy and green popcorn were offered for sale, as well as
green shoes, green hats, and green clothes of all sorts. At one
place a man was selling green lemonade, and when the children bought
it Dorothy could see that they paid for it with green pennies.
There seemed to be no horses nor animals of any kind. Instead, the
men carried things around in little green carts, which they pushed
before them. Everyone seemed happy and contented and prosperous.
The Guardian of the Gates led them through the streets until they
came to a big building, exactly in the middle of the City, which was
the Palace of Oz, the Great Wizard. There was a soldier before the
door, dressed in a green uniform and wearing a long green beard.
"Here are strangers," said the Guardian of the Gates to him, "and
they demand to see the Great Oz."
"Step inside," answered the soldier, "and I will carry your
message to him."
So they passed through the Palace gates and were led into a big room
with a green carpet and lovely green furniture set with emeralds.
The soldier made them all wipe their feet upon a green mat before
entering this room. When they were seated he said politely, "Please
make yourselves comfortable while I go to the door of the Throne
Room and tell Oz you are here."
They had to wait a long time before the soldier returned. When, at
last, he came back, Dorothy asked:
"Have you seen Oz?"
"Oh, no," returned the soldier. "I have never seen him. But I
spoke to him as he sat behind his screen, and gave him your message.
He said he will grant you an audience, if you so desire. But each
one of you must enter his presence alone, and he will admit but one
each day. Therefore, as you must remain in the Palace for several
days, I will have you shown to rooms where you may rest in comfort
after your journey."
"Thank you," replied the girl. "That is very kind of Oz."
The soldier now blew upon a green whistle, and at once a young girl,
dressed in a pretty green silk gown, entered the room. She had
lovely green hair and green eyes, and she bowed low before Dorothy
as she said, "Follow me and I will show you your room."
So Dorothy said good-by to all her friends except Toto, and taking
the dog in her arms followed the green girl through seven passages and
up three flights of stairs until they came to a room at the front of
the Palace. It was the sweetest little room in the world, with a
soft comfortable bed that had sheets of green silk and a green
velvet counterpane. There was a tiny fountain in the middle of the
room, that shot a spray of green perfume into the air, to fall back
into a beautifully carved green marble basin. Beautiful green
flowers stood in the windows, and there was a shelf with a row of
little green books. When Dorothy had time to open these books she
found them full of queer green pictures that made her laugh, they were
so funny.
In a wardrobe were many green dresses, made of silk and satin and
velvet. And all of them fitted Dorothy exactly.
"Make yourself perfectly at home," said the green girl, "and if
you wish for anything ring the bell. Oz will send for you tomorrow
morning."
She left Dorothy alone and went back to the others. These she also
led to rooms, and each one of them found himself lodged in a very
pleasant part of the Palace. Of course this politeness was wasted on
the Scarecrow; for when he found himself alone in his room he stood
stupidly in one spot, just within the doorway, to wait till morning.
It would not rest him to lie down, and he could not close his eyes. So
he remained all night staring at a little spider which was weaving its
web in a corner of the room, just as if it were not one of the most
wonderful rooms in the world. The Tin Woodman lay down on his bed from
force of habit, for he remembered when he was made of flesh. Not being
able to sleep, he passed the night moving his joints up and down to
make sure they kept in good working order. The Lion would have
preferred a bed of dried leaves in the forest, and did not like
being shut up in a room. But he had too much sense to let this worry
him. He sprang upon the bed and rolled himself up like a cat and
purred himself asleep in a minute.
The next morning, after breakfast, the green maiden came to fetch
Dorothy, and she dressed her in one of the prettiest gowns- made of
green brocaded satin. Dorothy put on a green silk apron and tied a
green ribbon around Toto's neck, and they started for the Throne
Room of the Great Oz.
First they came to a great hall in which were many ladies and
gentlemen of the court, all dressed in rich costumes. These people had
nothing to do but talk to each other, but they always came to wait
outside the Throne Room every morning, although they were never
permitted to see Oz.
As Dorothy entered they looked at her curiously, and one of them
whispered, "Are you really going to look upon the face of Oz the
Terrible?"
"Of course," answered the girl, "if he will see me."
"Oh, he will see you," said the soldier who had taken her message to
the Wizard, "although he does not like to have people ask to see
him. Indeed, at first he was angry and said I should send you back
where you came from. Then he asked me what you looked like, and when I
mentioned your silver shoes he was very much interested. At last I
told him about the mark upon your forehead, and he decided he would
admit you to his presence."
Just then a bell rang, and the green girl said to Dorothy, "That
is the signal. You must go into the Throne Room alone."
She opened a little door and Dorothy walked boldly through and found
herself in a wonderful place. It was a big, round room with a high
arched roof, and the walls and ceiling and floor were covered with
large emeralds set closely together. In the center of the roof was a
great light, as bright as the sun, which made the emeralds sparkle
in a wonderful manner.
But what interested Dorothy most was the big throne of green
marble that stood in the middle of the room. It was shaped like a
chair and sparkled with gems, as did everything else. In the center of
the chair was an enormous Head, without a body to support it or any
arms or legs whatever. There was no hair upon this head, but it had
eyes and nose and mouth, and was much bigger than the head of the
biggest giant.
As Dorothy gazed upon this in wonder and fear, the eyes turned
slowly and looked at her sharply and steadily. Then the mouth moved,
and Dorothy heard a voice.
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek
me?"
It was not such an awful voice as she had expected to come from
the big Head. So she took courage and answered, "I am Dorothy, the
Small and Meek. I have come to you for help."
The eyes looked at her thoughtfully for a full minute. Then said the
voice, "Where did you get the silver shoes?"
"I got them from the Wicked Witch of the East, when my house fell on
her and killed her," she replied.
"Where did you get the mark upon your forehead?" continued the
voice.
"That is where the Good Witch of the North kissed me when she bade
me good-by and sent me to you," said the girl.
Again the eyes looked at her sharply, and they saw she was telling
the truth. Then Oz asked, "What do you wish me to do?"
"Send me back to Kansas, where my Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are,"
she answered earnestly. "I don't like your country, although it is
so beautiful. And I am sure Aunt Em will be dreadfully worried over my
being away so long."
The eyes winked three times, and then they turned up to the
ceiling and down to the floor and rolled around so queerly that they
seemed to see every part of the room. And at last they looked at
Dorothy again.
"Why should I do this for you?" asked Oz.
"Because you are strong and I am weak. Because you are a Great
Wizard and I am only a little girl."
"But you were strong enough to kill the Wicked Witch of the East,"
said Oz.
"That just happened," returned Dorothy simply. "I could not help
it."
"Well," said the Head, "I will give you my answer. You have no right
to expect me to send you back to Kansas unless you do something for me
in return. In this country everyone must pay for everything he gets.
If you wish me to use my magic power to send you home again you must
do something for me first. Help me and I will help you."
"What must I do?" asked the girl.
"Kill the Wicked Witch of the West," answered Oz.
"But I cannot!" exclaimed Dorothy, greatly surprised.
"You killed the Witch of the East and you wear the silver shoes,
which bear a powerful charm. There is now but one Wicked Witch left in
all this land, and when you can tell me she is dead I will send you
back to Kansas- but not before."
The little girl began to weep, she was so much disappointed. And the
eyes winked again and looked upon her anxiously, as if the Great Oz
felt that she could help him if she would.
"I never killed anything, willingly," she sobbed. "Even if I
wanted to, how could I kill the Wicked Witch? If you, who are Great
and Terrible, cannot kill her yourself, how do you expect me to do
it?"
"I do not know," said the Head. "However, that is my answer, and
until the Wicked Witch dies you will not see your uncle and aunt
again. Remember that the Witch is Wicked- tremendously Wicked- and
ought to be killed. Now go, and do not ask to see me again until you
have done your task."
Sorrowfully Dorothy left the Throne Room and went back where the
Lion and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were waiting to hear what
Oz had said to her.
"There is no hope for me," she said sadly, "for Oz will not send
me home until I have killed the Wicked Witch of the West- and that I
can never do."
Her friends were sorry, but could do nothing to help her. So Dorothy
went to her own room and lay down on the bed and cried herself to
sleep.
The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the
Scarecrow and said, "Come with me, for Oz has sent for you."
So the Scarecrow followed him and was admitted into the great Throne
Room, where he saw, sitting in the emerald throne, a most lovely Lady.
She was dressed in green silk gauze and wore upon her flowing green
locks a crown of jewels. Growing from her shoulders were wings,
gorgeous in color and so light that they fluttered if the slightest
breath of air reached them.
When the Scarecrow had bowed, as prettily as his straw stuffing
would let him, before this beautiful creature, she looked upon him
sweetly.
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, Emerald and why do
you seek me?"
Now the Scarecrow, who had expected to see the great Head Dorothy
had told him of, was much astonished; but he answered her bravely.
"I am only a Scarecrow, stuffed with straw. Therefore I have no
brains, and I come to you praying that you will put brains in my
head instead of straw, so that I may become as much a man as any other
in your dominions."
"Why should I do this for you?" asked the Lady.
"Because you are wise and powerful, and no one else can help me,"
answered the Scarecrow.
"I never grant favors without some return," said Oz, "but this
much I will promise. If you will kill for me the Wicked Witch of the
West, I will bestow upon you a great many brains, and such good brains
that you will be the wisest man in all the Land of Oz."
"I thought you asked Dorothy to kill the Witch," said the Scarecrow,
in surprise.
"So I did. I don't care who kills her. But until she is dead I
will not grant your wish. Now go, and do not seek me again until you
have earned the brains you so greatly desire."
The Scarecrow went sorrowfully back to his friends and told them
what Oz had said; and Dorothy was surprised to find that the Great
Wizard was not a Head, as she had seen him, but a lovely Lady.
"All the same," said the Scarecrow, "she needs a heart as much as
the Tin Woodman."
On the next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to
the Tin Woodman and said, "Oz has sent for you. Follow me."
So the Tin Woodman followed him and came to the great Throne Room.
He did not know whether he would find Oz a lovely Lady or a Head,
but he hoped it would be the lovely Lady. "For," he said to himself,
"if it is the Head, I am sure I shall not be given a heart, since a
head has no heart of its own and therefore cannot feel for me. But
if it is the lovely Lady I shall beg hard for a heart, for all
ladies are themselves said to be kindly hearted.
But when the Woodman entered the great Throne Room he saw neither
the Head nor the Lady, for Oz had taken the shape of a most terrible
Beast. It was nearly as big as an elephant, and the green throne
seemed hardly strong enough to hold its weight. The Beast had a head
like that of a rhinoceros, only there were five eyes in its face.
There were five long arms growing out of its body, and it also had
five long, slim legs. Thick, woolly hair covered every part of it, and
a more dreadful-looking monster could not be imagined. It was
fortunate the Tin Woodman had no heart at that moment, for it would
have beat loud and fast from terror. But being only tin, the Woodman
was not at all afraid.
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible," spoke the Beast, in a voice
that was one great roar. "Who are you, and why do you seek me?"
"I am a Woodman, and made of tin. Therefore I have no heart, and
cannot love. I pray you to give me a heart that I may be as other
men are."
"Why should I do this?" demanded the Beast.
"Because I ask it, and you alone can grant my request," answered the
Woodman.
Oz gave a low growl at this, but said gruffly, "If you indeed desire
a heart, you must earn it."
"How?" asked the Woodman.
"Help Dorothy to kill the Wicked Witch of the West," replied the
Beast. "When the Witch is dead, come to me, and I will then give you
the biggest and kindest and most loving heart in all the Land of Oz."
So the Tin Woodman was forced to return sorrowfully to his friends
and tell them of the terrible Beast he had seen. They all wondered
greatly at the many forms the Great Wizard could take upon himself.
"If he is a Beast when I go to see him," said the Lion, "I shall
roar my loudest, and so frighten him that he will grant all I ask. And
if he is the lovely Lady, I shall pretend to spring upon her, and so
compel her to do my bidding. And if he is the great Head, he will be
at my mercy; for I will roll this head all about the room until he
promises to give us what we desire. So be of good cheer, my friends,
for all will yet be well."
The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers led the Lion to
the great Throne Room and bade him enter the presence of Oz.
The Lion at once passed through the door, and glancing around saw,
to his surprise, that before the throne was a Ball of Fire, so
fierce and glowing he could scarcely bear to gaze upon it. His first
thought was that Oz had by accident caught on fire and was burning up.
Yet, when he tried to go nearer, the heat was so intense that it
singed his whiskers, and he crept back tremblingly to a spot nearer
the door.
Then a low, quiet voice came from the Ball of Fire, and these were
the words it spoke:
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek
me?"
And the Lion answered, "I am a Cowardly Lion, afraid of
everything. I came to you to beg that you give me courage, so that
in reality I may become the King of Beasts, as men call me."
"Why should I give you courage?" demanded Oz.
"Because of all Wizards you are the greatest, and alone have power
to grant my request," answered the Lion.
The Ball of Fire burned fiercely for a time, and the voice said,
"Bring me proof that the Wicked Witch is dead, and that moment I
will give you courage. But as long as the Witch lives, you must remain
a coward."
The Lion was angry at this speech, but could say nothing in reply,
and while he stood silently gazing at the Ball of Fire it became so
furiously hot that he turned tail and rushed from the room. He was
glad to find his friends waiting for him, and told them of his
terrible interview with the Wizard.
"What shall we do now?" asked Dorothy sadly.
"There is only one thing we can do," returned the Lion, "and that is
to go to the land of the Winkies, seek out the Wicked Witch, and
destroy her."
"But suppose we cannot?" said the girl.
"Then I shall never have courage," declared the Lion.
"And I shall never have brains," added the Scarecrow.
"And I shall never have a heart," spoke the Tin of Woodman.
"And I shall never see Aunt Em and Uncle Henry," said Dorothy,
beginning to cry.
"Be careful" cried the green girl. "The tears will fall on your
green silk gown and spot it."
So Dorothy dried her eyes and said, "I suppose we must try it; but I
am sure I do not want to kill anybody, even to see Aunt Em again."
"I will go with you; but I'm too much of a coward to kill the
Witch," said the Lion.
"I will go too," declared the Scarecrow; "but I shall not be of much
help to you, I am such a fool."
"I haven't the heart to harm even a Witch," remarked the Tin
Woodman; "but if you go I certainly shall go with you."
Therefore it was decided to start upon their journey the next
morning, and the Woodman sharpened his axe on a green grindstone and
had all his joints properly oiled. The Scarecrow stuffed himself
with fresh straw and Dorothy put new paint on his eyes that he might
see better. The green girl, who was very kind to them, filled
Dorothy's basket with good things to eat, and fastened a little bell
around Toto's neck with a green ribbon.
They went to bed quite early and slept soundly until daylight,
when they were awakened by the crowing of a green cock that lived in
the yard of the Palace, and the cackling of a hen that had laid a
green egg.
CHAPTER TWELVE
The Search for the Wicked Witch

THE soldier with the green whiskers led them through the streets
of the Emerald City until they reached the room where the Guardian
of the Gates lived. This officer unlocked their spectacles to put them
back in his great box, and then he politely opened the gate for our
friends.
"Which road leads to the Wicked Witch of the West?" asked Dorothy.
"There is no road," answered the Guardian of the Gates. "No one ever
wishes to go that way."
"How, then, are we to find her?" inquired the girl.
"That will be easy," replied the man, "for when she knows you are in
the country of the Winkies she will find you, and make you all her
slaves."
"Perhaps not," said the Scarecrow, "for we mean to destroy her."
"Oh, that is different," said the Guardian of the Gates. "No one has
ever destroyed her before, so I naturally thought she would make
slaves of you, as she has of the rest. But take care. She is wicked
and fierce, and may not allow you to destroy her. Keep to the West,
where the sun sets, and you cannot fail to find her."
They thanked him and bade him good-by, and turned toward the West,
walking over fields of soft grass dotted here and there with daisies
and buttercups. Dorothy still wore the pretty silk dress she had put
on in the Palace, but now, to her surprise, she found it was no longer
green, but pure white. The ribbon around Toto's neck had also lost its
green color and was as white as Dorothy's dress.
The Emerald City was soon left far behind. As they advanced the
ground became rougher and hillier, for there were no farms nor
houses in this country of the West, and the ground was untilled.
In the afternoon the sun shone hot in their faces, for there were no
trees to offer them shade; so that before night Dorothy and Toto and
the Lion were tired, and lay down upon the grass and fell asleep, with
the Woodman and the Scarecrow keeping watch.
Now the Wicked Witch of the West had but one eye, yet that was as
powerful as a telescope, and could see everywhere. So, as she sat in
the door of her castle, she happened to look around and saw Dorothy
lying asleep, with her friends all about her. They were a long
distance off, but the Wicked Witch was angry to find them in her
country. So she blew upon a silver whistle that hung around her neck.
At once there came running to her from all directions a pack of
great wolves. They had long legs and fierce eyes and sharp teeth.
"Go to those people," said the Witch, "and tear them to pieces."
"Are you not going to make them your slaves?" asked the leader of
the wolves.
"No," she answered. "One is of tin, and one of straw; one is a
girl and another a Lion. None of them is fit to work, so you may
tear them into small pieces."
"Very well," said the wolf, and he dashed away at full speed,
followed by the others.
It was lucky the Scarecrow and the Woodman were wide awake and heard
the wolves coming.
"This is my fight," said the Woodman, "so get behind me and I will
meet them as they come."
He seized his axe, which he had made very sharp, and as the leader
of the wolves came on the Tin Woodman swung his arm and chopped the
wolf's head from its body, so that it immediately died. As soon as
he could raise his axe another wolf came up, and he also fell under
the sharp edge of the Tin Woodman's weapon. There were forty wolves,
and forty times a wolf was killed, so that at last they all lay dead
in a heap before the Woodman.
Then he put down his axe and sat beside the Scarecrow, who said, "It
was a good fight, friend."
They waited until Dorothy awoke the next morning. The little girl
was quite frightened when she saw the great pile of shaggy wolves, but
the Tin Woodman told her all. She thanked him for saving them and
sat down to breakfast, after which they started again upon their
journey.
Now this same morning the Wicked Witch came to the door of her
castle and looked out with her one eye that could see far off. She saw
all her wolves lying dead, and the strangers still traveling through
her country. This made her angrier than before, and she blew her
silver whistle twice.
Straightway a great flock of wild crows came flying toward her,
enough to darken the sky.
And the Wicked Witch said to the King Crow, "Fly at once to the
strangers. Peck out their eyes and tear them to pieces."
The wild crows flew in one great flock toward Dorothy and her
companions. When the little girl saw them coming she was afraid.
But the Scarecrow said, "This is my battle. Lie down beside me and
you will not be harmed."
So they all lay upon the ground except the Scarecrow, and he stood
up and stretched out his arms. And when the crows saw him they were
frightened- as these birds always are by scarecrows- and did not
dare to come any nearer.
But the King Crow said, "It is only a stuffed man. I will peck his
eyes out."
The King Crow flew at the Scarecrow, who caught it by the head and
twisted its neck until it died. And then another crow flew at him, and
the Scarecrow twisted its neck also. There were forty crows, and forty
times the Scarecrow twisted a neck, until at last all were lying
dead beside him. Then he called to his companions to rise, and again
they went upon their journey.
When the Wicked Witch looked out again and saw all her crows lying
in a heap, she got into a terrible rage, and blew three times upon her
silver whistle.
Forthwith there was heard a great buzzing in the air, and a swarm of
black bees came flying toward her.
"Go to the strangers and sting them to death!" commanded the
Witch, and the bees turned and flew rapidly until they came to where
Dorothy and her friends were walking. But the Woodman had seen them
coming, and the Scarecrow had decided what to do.
"Take out my straw and scatter it over the little girl and the dog
and the Lion," he said to the Woodman, "and the bees cannot sting
them." This the Woodman did, and as Dorothy lay close beside the
Lion and held Toto in her arms, the straw covered them entirely.
The bees came and found no one but the Woodman to sting, so they
flew at him and broke off all their stings against the tin, without
hurting the Woodman at all. And as bees cannot live when their
stings are broken that was the end of the black bees, and they lay
scattered thick about the Woodman, like little heaps of fine coal.
Then Dorothy and the Lion got up, and the girl helped the Tin
Woodman put the straw back into the Scarecrow again, until he was as
good as ever. So they started upon their journey once more.
The Wicked Witch was so angry when she saw her black bees in
little heaps like fine coal that she stamped her foot and tore her
hair and gnashed her teeth. And then she called a dozen of her slaves,
who were the Winkies, and gave them sharp spears, telling them to go
to the strangers and destroy them.
The Winkies were not a brave people, but they had to do as they were
told. So they marched away until they came near to Dorothy. Then the
Lion gave a great roar and sprang toward them, and the poor Winkies
were so frightened that they ran back as fast as they could.
When they returned to the castle the Wicked Witch beat them well
with a strap, and sent them back to their work, after which she sat
down to think what she should do next. She could not understand how
all her plans to destroy these strangers had failed. However, she
was a powerful Witch, as well as a wicked one, and she soon made up
her mind how to act.
There was, in her cupboard, a Golden Cap, with a circle of
diamonds and rubies running round it. This Golden Cap had a charm.
Whoever owned it could call three times upon the Winged Monkeys, who
would obey any order they were given. But no person could command
these strange creatures more than three times. Twice already the
Wicked Witch had used the charm of the Cap. Once was when she had made
the Winkies her slaves, and set herself to rule over their country.
The Winged Monkeys had helped her do this. The second time was when
she had fought against the Great Oz himself, and driven him out of the
land of the West. The Winged Monkeys had also helped her in doing
this. Only once more could she use this Golden Cap, for which reason
she did not like to do so until all her other powers were exhausted.
But now that her fierce wolves and her wild crows and her stinging
bees were gone, and her slaves had been scared away by the Cowardly
Lion, she saw there was only one way left to destroy Dorothy and her
friends.
So the Wicked Witch took the Golden Cap from her cupboard and placed
it upon her head. Then she stood upon her left foot and said slowly:
"Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!"
Next she stood upon her right foot and said:
"Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!"
After this she stood upon both feet and cried in a loud voice:
"Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!"
Now the charm began to work. The sky was darkened, and a low
rumbling sound was heard in the air. There was a rushing of many
wings, a great chattering and laughing, and the sun came out of the
dark sky to show the Wicked Witch surrounded by a crowd of monkeys,
each with a pair of immense and powerful wings on his shoulders.
One, much bigger than the others, seemed to be their leader. He flew
close to the Witch and said, "You have called us for the third and
last time. What do you command?"
"Go to the strangers who are within my land and destroy them all
except the Lion," said the Wicked Witch. "Bring that beast to me,
for I have a mind to harness him like a horse and make him work."
"Your commands shall be obeyed," said the leader. Then, with a great
deal of chattering and noise, the Winged Monkeys flew away to the
place where Dorothy and her friends were walking.
Some of the Monkeys seized the Tin Woodman and carried him through
the air until they were over a country thickly covered with sharp
rocks. Here they dropped the poor Woodman, who fell a great distance
to the rocks, where he lay so battered and dented that he could
neither move nor groan.
Others of the Monkeys caught the Scarecrow, and with their long
fingers pulled all of the straw out of his clothes and head. They made
his hat and boots and clothes into a small bundle and threw it into
the top branches of a tall tree.
The remaining Monkeys threw pieces of stout rope around the Lion and
wound many coils about his body and head and legs, until he was unable
to bite or scratch or struggle in any way. Then they lifted him up and
flew away with him to the Witch's castle, where he was placed in a
small yard with a high iron fence around it so that he could not
escape.
But Dorothy they did not harm at all. She stood, with Toto in her
arms, watching the sad fate of her comrades and thinking it would soon
be her turn. The leader of the Winged Monkeys flew up to her, his
long, hairy arms stretched out and his ugly face grinning terribly;
but he saw the mark of the Good Witch's kiss upon her forehead and
stopped short, motioning the others not to touch her.
"We dare not harm this little girl," he said to them, "for she is
protected by the Power of Good, and that is greater than the Power
of Evil. All we can do is to carry her to the castle of the Wicked
Witch and leave her there."
So, carefully and gently, they lifted Dorothy in their arms and
carried her swiftly through the air until they came to the castle,
where they set her down upon the front doorstep.
Then the leader said to the Witch, "We have obeyed you as far as
we were able. The Tin Woodman and the Scarecrow are destroyed, and the
Lion is tied up in your yard. The little girl we dare not harm, nor
the dog she carries in her arms. Your power over our band is now
ended, and you will never see us again."
Then all the Winged Monkeys, with much laughing and chattering and
noise, flew into the air and were soon out of sight.
The Wicked Witch was both surprised and worried when she saw the
mark on Dorothy's forehead, for she knew well that neither the
Winged Monkeys nor she, herself, dare hurt the girl in any way. She
looked down at Dorothy's feet, and seeing the Silver Shoes, began to
tremble with fear, for she knew what a powerful charm belonged to
them. At first the Witch was tempted to run away from Dorothy. But she
happened to look into the child's eyes and saw how simple the soul
behind them was, and that the little girl did not know of the
wonderful power the Silver Shoes gave her. So the Wicked Witch laughed
to herself, and thought, "I can still make her my slave, for she
does not know how to use her power."
Then she said to Dorothy, harshly and severely, "Come with me, and
see that you mind everything I tell you. If you do not I will make
an end of you, as I did of the Tin Woodman and the Scarecrow."
Dorothy followed her through many of the beautiful rooms in her
castle until they came to the kitchen, where the Witch bade her
clean the pots and kettles and sweep the floor and keep the fire fed
with wood.
Dorothy went to work meekly, with her mind made up to work as hard
as she could; for she was glad the Wicked Witch had decided not to
kill her.
With Dorothy hard at work, the Witch thought she would go into the
courtyard and harness the Cowardly Lion like a horse. It would amuse
her, she was sure, to make him draw her chariot whenever she wished to
go to drive. But as she opened the gate the Lion gave a loud roar
and bounded at her so fiercely that the Witch was afraid, and ran
out and shut the gate again.
"If I cannot harness you," said the Witch to the Lion, speaking
through the bars of the gate, "I can starve you. You shall have
nothing to eat until you do as I wish."
So after that she took no food to the imprisoned Lion. But every day
she came to the gate at noon and asked, "Are you ready to be harnessed
like a horse?"
And the Lion would answer, "No. If you come in this yard, I will
bite you."
The reason the Lion did not have to do as the Witch wished was
that every night, while the woman was asleep, Dorothy carried him food
from the cupboard. After he had eaten he would lie down on his bed
of straw, and Dorothy would lie beside him and put her head on his
soft, shaggy mane, while they talked of their troubles and tried to
plan some way to escape. But they could find no way to get out of
the castle, for it was constantly guarded by the yellow Winkies, who
were the slaves of the Wicked Witch and too afraid of her not to do as
she told them.
The girl had to work hard during the day, and often the Witch
threatened to beat her with the same old umbrella she always carried
in her hand. But, in truth, she did not dare to strike Dorothy,
because of the mark upon her forehead. The child did not know this,
and was full of fear for herself and Toto. Once the Witch struck
Toto a blow with her umbrella and the brave little dog flew at her and
bit her leg in return. The Witch did not bleed where she was bitten,
for she was so wicked that the blood in her had dried up many years
before.
Dorothy's life became very sad as she grew to understand that it
would be harder than ever to get back to Kansas and Aunt Em again.
Sometimes she would cry bitterly for hours, with Toto sitting at her
feet and looking into her face, whining dismally to show how sorry
he was for his little mistress. Toto did not really care whether he
was in Kansas or the Land of Oz so long as Dorothy was with him; but
he knew the little girl was unhappy, and that made him unhappy too.
Now the Wicked Witch had a great longing to have for her own the
Silver Shoes which the girl always wore. Her bees and her crows and
her wolves were lying in heaps and drying up, and she had used up
all the power of the Golden Cap. But if she could only get hold of the
Silver Shoes, they would give her more power than all the other things
she had lost. She watched Dorothy carefully, to see if she ever took
off her shoes, thinking she might steal them. But the child was so
proud of her pretty shoes that she never took them off except at night
and when she took her bath. The Witch was too much afraid of the
dark to dare go in Dorothy's room at night to take the shoes, and
her dread of water was greater than her fear of the dark, so she never
came near when Dorothy was bathing. Indeed, the old Witch never
touched water, nor ever let water touch her in any way.
But the wicked creature was very cunning, and she finally thought of
a trick that would give her what she wanted. She placed a bar of
iron in the middle of the kitchen floor, and then by her magic arts
made the iron invisible to human eyes. So that when Dorothy walked
across the floor she stumbled over the bar, not being able to see
it, and fell at full length. She was not much hurt, but in her fall
one of the Silver Shoes came off. Then before she could reach it,
the Witch had snatched it away and put it on her own skinny foot.
The wicked woman was greatly pleased with the success of her
trick, for as long as she had one of the shoes she owned half the
power of their charm, and Dorothy could not use it against her, even
had she known how to do so.
The little girl, seeing she had lost one of her pretty shoes, grew
angry, and said to the Witch, "Give me back my shoe!"
"I will not," retorted the Witch, "for it is now my shoe, and not
yours."
"You are a wicked creature!" cried Dorothy. "You have no right to
take my shoe from me."
"I shall keep it, just the same," said the Witch, laughing at her,
"and someday I shall get the other one from you, too."
This made Dorothy so very angry that she picked up the bucket of
water that stood near and dashed it over the Witch, wetting her from
head to foot.
Instantly the wicked woman gave a loud cry of fear, and then, as
Dorothy looked at her in wonder, the Witch began to shrink and fall
away.
"See what you have done!" she screamed. "In a minute I shall melt
away."
"I'm very sorry, indeed," said Dorothy, who was truly frightened
to see the Witch actually melting away like brown sugar before her
very eyes.
"Didn't you know water would be the end of me?" asked the Witch,
in a wailing, despairing voice.
"Of course not," answered Dorothy. "How. should I?"
"Well, in a few minutes I shall be all melted, and you will have the
castle to yourself. I have been wicked in my day, but I never
thought a little girl like you would ever be able to melt me and end
my wicked deeds. Look out- here I go!"
With these words the Witch fell down in a brown, melted, shapeless
mass and began to spread over the clean boards of the kitchen floor.
Seeing that she had really melted away to nothing, Dorothy drew
another bucket of water and threw it over the mess. She then swept
it all out the door. After picking out the silver shoe, which was
all that was left of the old woman, she cleaned and dried it with a
cloth, and put it on her foot again. Then, being at last free to do as
she chose, she ran out to the courtyard to tell the Lion that the
Wicked Witch of the West had come to an end, and that they were no
longer prisoners in a strange land.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Rescue

THE Cowardly Lion was much pleased to hear that the Wicked Witch had
been melted by a bucket of water, and Dorothy at once unlocked the
gate of his prison and set him free. They went in together to the
castle, where Dorothy's first act was to call all the Winkies together
and tell them that they were no longer slaves.
There was great rejoicing among the yellow Winkies, for they had
been made to work hard during many years for the Wicked Witch, who had
always treated them with great cruelty. They kept this day as a
holiday, then and ever after, and spent the time in feasting and
dancing.
"If our friends, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, were only with
us," said the Lion, "I should be quite happy."
"Don't you suppose we could rescue them?" asked the girl anxiously.
"We can try," answered the Lion.
So they called the yellow Winkies and asked them if they would
help to rescue their friends, and the Winkies said that they would
be delighted to do all in their power for Dorothy, who had set them
free from bondage. So she chose a number of the Winkies who looked
as if they knew the most, and they all started away. They traveled
that day and part of the next until they came to the rocky plain where
the Tin Woodman lay, all battered and bent. His axe was near him,
but the blade was rusted and the handle broken off short.
The Winkies lifted him tenderly in their arms, and carried him
back to the Yellow Castle again, Dorothy shedding a few tears by the
way at the sad plight of her old friend, and the Lion looking sober
and sorry.
When they reached the castle Dorothy said to the Winkies, "Are any
of your people tinsmiths?"
"Oh, yes. Some of us are very good tinsmiths," they told her.
"Then bring them to me," she said. And when the tinsmiths came,
bringing with them all their tools in baskets, she inquired, "Can
you straighten out those dents in the Tin Woodman, and bend him back
into shape again, and solder him together where he is broken?"
The tinsmiths looked the Woodman over carefully and then answered
that they thought they could mend him so he would be as good as
ever. So they set to work in one of the big yellow rooms of the castle
and worked for three days and four nights, hammering and twisting
and bending and soldering and polishing and pounding at the legs and
body and head of the Tin Woodman, until at last he was straightened
out into his old form, and his joints worked as well as ever. To be
sure, there were several patches on him, but the tinsmiths did a
good job, and as the Woodman was not a vain man he did not mind the
patches at all.
When at last he walked into Dorothy's room and thanked her for
rescuing him, he was so pleased that he wept tears of joy, and Dorothy
had to wipe every tear carefully from his face with her apron, so
his joints would not be rusted. At the same time her own tears fell
thick and fast at the joy of meeting her old friend again, and these
tears did not need to be wiped away. As for the Lion, he wiped his
eyes so often with the tip of his tail that it became quite wet, and
he was obliged to go out into the courtyard and hold it in the sun
till it dried.
"If we only had the Scarecrow with us again," said the Tin
Woodman, when Dorothy had finished telling him everything that had
happened, "I should be quite happy."
"We must try to find him," said the girl.
So she called the Winkies to help her, and they walked all that
day and part of the next until they came to the tall tree in the
branches of which the Winged Monkeys had tossed the Scarecrow's
clothes.
It was a very tall tree, and the trunk was so smooth that no one
could climb it; but the Woodman said at once, "I'll chop it down,
and then we can get the Scarecrow's clothes."
Now while the tinsmiths had been at work mending the Woodman
himself, another of the Winkies, who was a goldsmith, had made an
axe-handle of solid gold and fitted it to the Woodman's axe, instead
of the old broken handle. Others polished the blade until all the rust
was removed and it glistened like burnished silver.
As soon as he had spoken, the Tin Woodman began to chop, and in a
short time the tree fell over with a crash, whereupon the
Scarecrow's clothes fell out of the branches and rolled off on the
ground.
Dorothy picked them up and had the Winkies carry them back to the
castle, where they were stuffed with nice, clean straw- and behold!
here was the Scarecrow, as good as ever, thanking them over and over
again for saving him.
Now that they were reunited, Dorothy and her friends spent a few
happy days at the Yellow Castle, where they found everything they
needed to make them comfortable.
But one day the girl thought of Aunt Em, and said, "We must go
back to Oz, and claim his promise."
"Yes," said the Woodman, "at last I shall get my heart."
"And I shall get my brains," added the Scarecrow joyfully.
"And I shall get my courage," said the Lion thoughtfully.
"And I shall get back to Kansas," cried Dorothy, clapping her hands.
"Oh, let us start for the Emerald City tomorrow!"
This they decided to do. The next day they called the Winkies
together and bade them good-by. The Winkies were sorry to have them
go, and they had grown so fond of the Tin Woodman that they begged him
to stay and rule over them and the Yellow Land of the West. Finding
they were determined to go, the Winkies gave Toto and the Lion each
a golden collar. To Dorothy they presented a beautiful bracelet
studded with diamonds. To the Scarecrow they gave a gold-headed
walking stick, to keep him from stumbling. And to the Tin Woodman they
offered a silver oilcan, inlaid with gold and set with precious
jewels.
Every one of the travelers made the Winkies a pretty speech in
return, and all shook hands with them until their arms ached.
Dorothy went to the Witch's cupboard to fill her basket with food
for the journey, and there she saw the Golden Cap. She tried it on her
own head and found that it fitted her exactly. She did not know
anything about the charm of the Golden Cap, but she saw that it was
pretty. So she made up her mind to wear it and carry her sunbonnet
in the basket.
Then, being prepared for the journey, they all started for the
Emerald City. And the Winkies gave them three cheers and many good
wishes to carry with them.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The Winged Monkeys

YOU will remember there was no road- not even a pathway- between the
castle of the Wicked Witch and the Emerald City. When the four
travelers went in search of the Witch she had seen them coming, and so
sent the Winged Monkeys to bring them to her. It was much harder to
find their way back through the big fields of buttercups and bright
daisies than it was being carried. They knew, of course, they must
go straight east, toward the rising sun, and they started off in the
right way. But at noon, when the sun was over their heads, they did
not know which was east and which was west, and that was the reason
they were lost in the great fields. They kept on walking, however, and
at night the moon came out and shone brightly. So they lay down
among the sweet-smelling yellow flowers and slept soundly until
morning- all but the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman.
The next morning the sun was behind a cloud, but they started on, as
if they were quite sure which way they were going.
"If we walk far enough," said Dorothy, "I am sure we shall
sometime come to someplace."
But day by day passed away, and they still saw nothing before them
but the scarlet fields. The Scarecrow began to grumble a bit.
"We have surely lost our way," he said, "and unless we find it again
in time to reach the Emerald City, I shall never get my brains."
"Nor I my heart," declared the Tin Woodman. "It seems to me I can
scarcely wait till I get to Oz, and you must admit this is a very long
journey."
"You see," said the Cowardly Lion, with a whimper, "I haven't the
courage to keep tramping forever, without getting anywhere at all."
Then Dorothy lost heart. She sat down on the grass and looked at her
companions, and they sat down and looked at her, and Toto found that
for the first time in his life he was too tired to chase a butterfly
that flew past his head. So he put out his tongue and panted and
looked at Dorothy as if to ask what they should do next.
"Suppose we call the field mice," she suggested. "They could
probably tell us the way to the Emerald City."
"To be sure they could," cried the Scarecrow. "Why didn't we think
of that before?"
Dorothy blew the little whistle she had always carried about her
neck since the Queen of the Mice had given it to her. In a few minutes
they heard the pattering of tiny feet, and many of the small gray mice
came running up to her.
Among them was the Queen herself, who asked, in her squeaky little
voice, "What can I do for my friends?"
"We have lost our way," said Dorothy. "Can you tell us where the
Emerald City is?"
"Certainly," answered the Queen; "but it is a great way off, for you
have had it at your backs all this time." Then she noticed Dorothy's
Golden Cap, and said, "Why don't you use the charm of the Cap, and
call the Winged Monkeys to you? They will carry you to the City of
Oz in less than an hour."
"I didn't know there was a charm," answered Dorothy, in surprise.
"What is it?"
"It is written inside the Golden Cap," replied the Queen of the
Mice. "But if you are going to call the Winged Monkeys we must run
away, for they are full of mischief and think it great fun to plague
us."
"Won't they hurt me?" asked the girl anxiously.
"Oh, no. They must obey the wearer of the Cap. Good-by!" And she
scampered out of sight, with all the mice hurrying after her.
Dorothy looked inside the Golden Cap and saw some words written upon
the lining. These, she thought, must be the charm, so she read the
directions carefully and put the Cap upon her head.
"Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!" she said, standing on her left foot.
"What did you say?" asked the Scarecrow, who did not know what she
was doing.
"Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!" Dorothy went on, standing this time on her
right foot.
"Hello!" replied the Tin Woodman calmly.
"Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!" said Dorothy, who was now standing on both
feet. This ended the saying of the charm, and they heard a great
chattering and flapping of wings, as the band of Winged Monkeys flew
up to them.
The King bowed low before Dorothy, and asked, "What is your
command?"
"We wish to go to the Emerald City," said the child, "and we have
lost our way."
"We will carry you," replied the King, and no sooner had he spoken
than two of the Monkeys caught Dorothy in their arms and flew away
with her. Others took the Scarecrow and the Woodman and the Lion,
and one little Monkey seized Toto and flew after them, although the
dog tried hard to bite him.
The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were rather frightened at first,
for they remembered how badly the Winged Monkeys had treated them
before. But they saw that no harm was intended, so they rode through
the air quite cheerfully, and had a fine time looking at the pretty
gardens and woods far below them.
Dorothy found herself riding easily between two of the biggest
Monkeys, one of them the King himself. They had made a chair of
their hands and were careful not to hurt her.
"Why do you have to obey the charm of the Golden Cap?" she asked.
"That is a long story," answered the King, with a Winged laugh. "But
as we have a long journey before us, I will pass the time by telling
you about it, if you wish."
"I shall be glad to hear it," she replied.
"Once," began the leader, "we were a free people, living happily
in the great forest, flying from tree to tree, eating nuts and
fruit, and doing just as we pleased without calling anybody master.
Perhaps some of us were rather too full of mischief at times, flying
down to pull the tails of the animals that had no wings, chasing
birds, and throwing nuts at the people who walked in the forest. But
we were careless and happy and full of fun, and enjoyed every minute
of the day. This was many years ago, long before Oz came out of the
clouds to rule over this land.
"There lived here then, away at the North, a beautiful princess, who
was also a powerful sorceress. All her magic was used to help the
people, and she was never known to hurt anyone who was good. Her
name was Gayelette, and she lived in a handsome palace built from
great blocks of ruby. Everyone loved her, but her greatest sorrow
was that she could find no one to love in return, since all the men
were much too stupid and ugly to marry one so beautiful and wise. At
last, however, she found a boy who was handsome and manly and wise
beyond his years. Gayelette made up her mind that when he grew to be a
man she would make him her husband. So she took him to her ruby palace
and used all her magic powers to make him as strong and good and
lovely as any woman could wish. When he grew to manhood, Quelala, as
he was called, was said to be the best and wisest man in all the land,
while his manly beauty was so great that Gayelette loved him dearly,
and hastened to make everything ready for the wedding.
"My grandfather was at that time the King of the Winged Monkeys
which lived in the forest near Gayelette's palace, and the old
fellow loved a joke better than a good dinner. One day, just before
the wedding, my grandfather was flying out with his band when he saw
Quelala walking beside the river. He was dressed in a rich costume
of pink silk and purple velvet, and my grandfather thought he would
see what he could do. At his word the band flew down and seized
Quelala, carried him in their arms until they were over the middle
of the river, and then dropped him into the water.
"'Swim out, my fine fellow,' cried my grandfather, 'and see if the
water has spotted your clothes.' Quelala was much too wise not to
swim, and he was not in the least spoiled by all his good fortune.
He laughed, when he came to the top of the water, and swam in to
shore. But when Gayelette came running out to him she found his
silks and velvet all ruined by the river.
"The princess was angry, and she knew, of course, who did it. She
had all the Winged Monkeys brought before her, and she said at first
that their wings should be tied and they should be treated as they had
treated Quelala, and dropped in the river. But my grandfather
pleaded hard, for he knew the Monkeys would drown in the river with
their wings tied, and Quelala said a kind word for them also. So
Gayelette finally spared them, on condition that the Winged Monkeys
should ever after do three times the bidding of the owner of the
Golden Cap. This Cap had been made for a wedding present to Quelala,
and it is said to have cost the princess half her kingdom. Of course
my grandfather and all the other Monkeys at once agreed to the
condition, and that is how it happens that we are three times the
slaves of the owner of the Golden Cap, whosoever he may be."
"And what became of them?" asked Dorothy, who had been greatly
interested in the story.
"Quelala being the first owner of the Golden Cap," replied the
Monkey, "he was the first to lay his wishes upon us. As his bride
could not bear the sight of us, he called us all to him in the
forest after he had married her and ordered us always to keep where
she could never again set eyes on a Winged Monkey, which we were
glad to do, for we were all afraid of her.
"This was all we ever had to do until the Golden Cap fell into the
hands of the Wicked Witch of the West, who made us enslave the
Winkies, and afterward drive Oz himself out of the Land of the West.
Now the Golden Cap is yours, and three times you have the right to lay
your wishes upon us."
As the Monkey King finished his story Dorothy looked down and saw
the green, shining walls of the Emerald City before them. She wondered
at the rapid flight of the Monkeys, but was glad the journey was over.
The strange creatures set the travelers down carefully before the gate
of the City, the King bowed low to Dorothy, and then flew swiftly
away, followed by all his band.
"That was a good ride," said the little girl.
"Yes, and a quick way out of our troubles," replied the Lion. "How
lucky it was you brought away that wonderful Cap!"
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The Discovery of Oz the Terrible

THE four travelers walked up to the great gate of Emerald City and
rang the bell. After ringing several times, it was opened by the
same Guardian of the Gates they had met before.
"What! Are you back again?" he asked, in surprise.
"Do you not see us?" answered the Scarecrow.
"But I thought you had gone to visit the Wicked Witch of the West."
"We did visit her," said the Scarecrow.
"And she let you go again?" asked the man, in wonder.
"She could not help it, for she is melted," explained the Scarecrow.
"Melted! Well, that is good news, indeed," said the man. "Who melted
her?"
"It was Dorothy," said the Lion gravely.
"Good gracious!" exclaimed the man, and he bowed very low indeed
before her.
Then he led them into his little room and locked the spectacles from
the great box on all their eyes, just as he had done before. Afterward
they passed on through the gate into the Emerald City. When the people
heard from the Guardian of the Gates that Dorothy had melted the
Wicked Witch of the West, they all gathered around the travelers and
followed them in a great crowd to the Palace of Oz.
The soldier with the green whiskers was still on guard before the
door, but he let them in at once. There they were again met by the
beautiful green girl, who showed each of them to their old rooms at
once, so they might rest until the Great Oz was ready to receive them.
The soldier had the news carried straight to Oz that Dorothy and the
other travelers had come back again, after destroying the Wicked
Witch. But Oz made no reply. They thought the Great Wizard would
send for them at once, but he did not. They had no word from him the
next day, nor the next, nor the next. The waiting was tiresome and
wearing, and at last they grew vexed that Oz should treat them in so
poor a fashion, after sending them to undergo hardships and slavery.
So the Scarecrow at last asked the green girl to take another
message to Oz, saying if he did not let them in to see him at once
they would call the Winged Monkeys to help them, and find out
whether he kept his promises or not. When the Wizard was given this
message he was so frightened that he sent word for them to come to the
Throne Room at four minutes after nine o'clock the next morning. He
had once met the Winged Monkeys in the Land of the West, and he did
not wish to meet them again.
The four travelers passed a sleepless night, each thinking of the
gift Oz had promised to bestow on him. Dorothy fell asleep only
once, and then she dreamed she was in Kansas, where Aunt Em was
telling her how glad she was to have her little girl at home again.
Promptly at nine o'clock the next morning the green-whiskered
soldier came to them, and four minutes later they all went into the
Throne Room of the Great Oz.
Of course, each one of them expected to see the Wizard in the
shape he had taken before, and all were greatly surprised when they
looked about and saw no one at all in the room. They kept close to the
door and closer to one another, for the stillness of the empty room
was more dreadful than any of the forms they had seen Oz take.
Presently they heard a solemn Voice, that seemed to come from
somewhere near the top of the great dome.
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Why do you seek me?"
They looked again in every part of the room, and then, seeing no
one, Dorothy asked, "Where are you?"
"I am everywhere," answered the Voice, "but to the eyes of common
mortals I am invisible. I will now seat myself upon my throne, that
you may converse with me." Indeed, the Voice seemed just then to
come straight from the throne itself. So they walked toward it and
stood in a row.
"We have come to claim our promise, O Oz," Dorothy said.
"What promise?" asked Oz.
"You promised to send me back to Kansas when the Wicked Witch was
destroyed," said the girl.
"And you promised to give me brains," said the Scarecrow.
"And you promised to give me a heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"And you promised to give me courage," said the Cowardly Lion.
"Is the Wicked Witch really destroyed?" asked the Voice, and Dorothy
thought it trembled a little.
"Yes, she answered, "I melted her with a bucket of water."
"Dear me," said the Voice, "how sudden! Well, come to me tomorrow,
for I must have time to think it over."
"You've had plenty of time already," said the Tin Woodman angrily.
"We shan't wait a day longer," said the Scarecrow.
"You must keep your promises to us!" exclaimed Dorothy.
The Lion thought it might be as well to frighten the Wizard, so he
gave a large, loud roar, which was so fierce and dreadful that Toto
jumped away from him in alarm and tipped over the screen that stood in
a corner. As it fell with a crash they looked that way, and the next
moment all of them were filled with wonder. For they saw, standing
in just the spot the screen had hidden, a little old man, with a
bald head and a wrinkled face, who seemed to be as much surprised as
they were. The Tin Woodman, raising his axe, rushed toward the
little man and cried out, "Who are you?"
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible," said the little man, in a
trembling voice. "But don't strike me- please don't- and I'll do
anything you want me to."
Our friends looked at him in surprise and dismay.
"I thought Oz was a great Head," said Dorothy.
"And I thought Oz was a lovely Lady," said the Scarecrow.
"And I thought Oz was a terrible Beast," said the Tin Woodman.
"And I thought Oz was a Ball of Fire," exclaimed the Lion.
"No, you are all wrong," said the little man meekly. "I have been
making believe."
"Making believe!" cried Dorothy. "Are you not a Great Wizard?"
"Hush, my dear," he said. "Don't speak so loud, or you will be
overheard- and I should be ruined. I'm supposed to be a Great Wizard."
"And aren't you?" she asked.
"Not a bit of it, my dear. I'm just a common man."
"You're more than that," said the Scarecrow, in a grieved tone.
"You're a humbug."
"Exactly so!" declared the little man, rubbing his hands together as
if it pleased him. "I am a humbug."
"But this is terrible," said the Tin Woodman. "How shall I ever
get my heart?"
"Or I my courage?" asked the Lion.
"Or I my brains?" wailed the Scarecrow, wiping the tears from his
eyes with his coat sleeve.
"My dear friends," said Oz, "I pray you not to speak of these little
things. Think of me, and the terrible trouble I'm in at being found
out."
"Doesn't anyone else know you're a humbug?" asked Dorothy.
"No one knows it but you four- and myself," replied Oz. "I have
fooled everyone so long that I thought I should never be found out. It
was a great mistake my ever letting you into the Throne Room.
Usually I will not see even my subjects, and so they believe I am
something terrible."
"But I don't understand," said Dorothy, in bewilderment. "How was it
that you appeared to me as a great Head?"
"That was one of my tricks," answered Oz. "Step this way, please,
and I will tell you all about it."
He led the way to a small chamber in the rear of the Throne Room,
and they all followed him. He pointed to one corner, in which lay
the great Head, made out of many thicknesses of paper, and with a
carefully painted face.
"This I hung from the ceiling by a wire," said Oz. "I stood behind
the screen and pulled a thread, to make the eyes move and the mouth
open."
"But how about the voice?" she inquired.
"Oh, I am a ventriloquist," said the little man. "I can throw the
sound of my voice wherever I wish, so that you thought it was coming
out of the Head. Here are the other things I used to deceive you."
He showed the Scarecrow the dress and the mask he had worn when he
seemed to be the lovely Lady. And the Tin Woodman saw that his
terrible Beast was nothing but a lot of skins, sewn together, with
slats to keep their sides out. As for the Ball of Fire, the false
Wizard had hung that also from the ceiling. It was really a ball of
cotton, but when oil was poured upon it the ball burned fiercely.
"Really," said the Scarecrow, "you ought to be ashamed of yourself
for being such a humbug."
"I am- I certainly am," answered the little man sorrowfully. "But it
was the only thing I could do. Sit down, please, there are plenty of
chairs. I will tell you my story."
So they sat down and listened while he told the following tale.
"I was born in Omaha-"
"Why, that isn't very far from Kansas!" cried Dorothy.
"No, but it's farther from here," he said, shaking his head at her
sadly. "When I grew up I became a ventriloquist, and at that I was
very well trained by a great master. I can imitate any kind of a
bird or beast." Here he mewed so like a kitten that Toto pricked up
his ears and looked everywhere to see where she was. "After a time,"
continued Oz, "I tired of that, and became a balloonist."
"What is that?" asked Dorothy.
"A man who goes up in a balloon on circus day, so as to draw a crowd
of people together and get them to pay to see the circus," he
explained.
"Oh," she said, "I know."
"Well, one day I went up in a balloon and the ropes got twisted,
so that I couldn't come down again. It went way up above the clouds,
so far that a current of air struck it and carried it many, many miles
away. For a day and a night I traveled through the air, and on the
morning of the second day I awoke and found the balloon floating
over a strange and beautiful country.
"It came down gradually, and I was not hurt a bit. But I found
myself in the midst of a strange people, who, seeing me come from
the clouds, thought I was a Great Wizard. Of course I let them think
so, because they were afraid of me, and promised to do anything I
wished them to.
"Just to amuse myself, and keep the good people busy, I ordered them
to build this City, and my Palace; and they did it all willingly and
well. Then I thought, as the country was so green and beautiful, I
would call it the Emerald City. And to make the name fit better I
put green spectacles on all the people, so that everything they saw
was green."
"But isn't everything here green?" asked Dorothy.
"No more than in any other city," replied Oz. "But when you wear
green spectacles, why of course everything you see looks green to you.
The Emerald City was built a great many years ago, for I was a young
man when the balloon brought me here, and I am a very old man now. But
my people have worn green glasses on their eyes so long that most of
them think it really is an Emerald City, and it certainly is a
beautiful place, abounding in jewels and precious metals, and every
good thing that is needed to make one happy. I have been good to the
people, and they like me. But ever since this Palace was built, I have
shut myself up and would not see any of them.
"One of my greatest fears was the Witches, for while I had no
magical powers at all I soon found out that the Witches were really
able to do wonderful things. There were four of them in this
country, and they ruled the people who live in the North and South and
East and West. Fortunately, the Witches of the North and South were
good, and I knew they would do me no harm. But the Witches of the East
and West were terribly wicked, and had they not thought I was more
powerful than they themselves, they would surely have destroyed me. As
it was, I lived in deadly fear of them for many years. So you can
imagine how pleased I was when I heard your house had fallen on the
Wicked Witch of the East. When you came to me, I was willing to
promise anything if you would only do away with the other Witch. Now
that you have melted her, I am ashamed to say that I cannot keep my
promises."
"I think you are a very bad man," said Dorothy.
"Oh, no, my dear! I'm really a very good man, but I'm a very bad
Wizard, I must admit."
"Can't you give me brains?" asked the Scarecrow.
"You don't need them. You are learning something every day. A baby
has brains, but it doesn't know much. Experience is the only thing
that brings knowledge, and the longer you are on earth the more
experience You are sure to get."
"That may all be true," said the Scarecrow, "but I shall be very
unhappy unless you give me brains."
The false Wizard looked at him carefully.
"Well," he said with a sigh, "I'm not much of a magician, as I said.
But if you will come to me tomorrow morning, I will stuff your head
with brains. I cannot tell you how to use them, however. You must find
that out for yourself."
"Oh, thank you- thank you!" cried the Scarecrow. "I'll find a way to
use them, never fear!"
"But how about my courage?" asked the Lion anxiously.
"You have plenty of courage, I am sure," answered Oz. "All you
need is confidence in yourself. There is no living thing that is not
afraid when it faces danger. The True courage is in facing danger when
you are afraid, and that kind of courage you have in plenty."
"Perhaps I have, but I'm scared just the same," said the Lion. "I
shall really be very unhappy unless you give me the sort of courage
that makes one forget he is afraid."
"Very well, I will give you that sort of courage tomorrow,"
replied Oz.
"How about my heart?" asked the Tin Woodman.
"Why, as for that," answered Oz, "I think you are wrong to want a
heart. It makes most people unhappy. If you only knew it, you are in
luck not to have a heart."
"That must be a matter of opinion," said the Tin Woodman. "For my
part, I will bear all the unhappiness without a murmur, if you will
give me the heart."
"Very well," answered Oz meekly. "Come to me tomorrow and you
shall have a heart. I have played Wizard for so many years that I
may as well continue the part a little longer."
"And now," said Dorothy, "how am I to get back to Kansas?"
"We shall have to think about that," replied the little man. "Give
me two or three days to consider the matter and I'll try to find a way
to carry you over the desert. In the meantime you shall all be treated
as my guests, and while you live in the Palace my people will wait
upon you and obey your slightest wish. There is only one thing I ask
in return for my help- such as it is. You must keep my secret and tell
no one I am a humbug."
They agreed to say nothing of what they had learned, and went back
to their rooms in high spirits. Even Dorothy had hope that "The
Great and Terrible Humbug," as she called him, would find a way to
send her back to Kansas, and if he did she was willing to forgive
him everything.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
The Magic Art of the Great Humbug

NEXT morning the Scarecrow said to his friends:
"Congratulate me. I am going to Oz to get my brains at last. When
I return I shall be as other men are."
"I have always liked you as you were," said Dorothy simply.
"It is kind of you to like a Scarecrow," he replied. "But surely you
will think more of me when you hear the splendid thoughts my new brain
is going to turn out." Then he said good-by to them all in a
cheerful voice and went to the Throne Room, where he rapped upon the
door.
"Come in," said Oz.
The Scarecrow went in and found the little man sitting down by the
window, engaged in deep thought. "I have come for my brains," remarked
the Scarecrow, a little uneasily.
"Oh, yes. Sit down in that chair, please," replied Oz. "You must
excuse me for taking your head off, but I shall have to do it in order
to put your brains in their proper place."
"That's all right," said the Scarecrow. "You are quite welcome to
take my head off, as long as it will be a better one when you put it
on again."
So the Wizard unfastened his head and emptied out the straw. Then he
entered the back room and took up a measure of bran, which he mixed
with a great many pins and needles. Having shaken them together
thoroughly, he filled the top of the Scarecrow's head with the mixture
and stuffed the rest of the space with straw, to hold it in place.
When he had fastened the Scarecrow's head on his body again he
said to him, "Hereafter you will be a great man, for I have given
you a lot of bran-new brains."
The Scarecrow was both pleased and proud at the fulfillment of his
greatest wish, and having thanked Oz warmly he went back to his
friends.
Dorothy looked at him curiously. His head was quite bulged out at
the top with brains.
"How do you feel?" she asked.
"I feel wise indeed," he answered earnestly. "When I get used to
my brains I shall know everything."
"Why are those needles and pins sticking out of your head?" asked
the Tin Woodman.
"That is proof that he is sharp," remarked the Lion.
"Well, I must go to Oz and get my heart," said the Woodman. So he
walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.
"Come in," called Oz, and the Woodman entered and said, "I have come
for my heart."
"Very well," answered the little man. "But I shall have to cut a
hole in your breast, so I can put your heart in the right place. I
hope it won't hurt you."
"Oh, no," answered the Woodman. "I shall not feel it at all."
So Oz brought a pair of tinner's shears and cut a small, square hole
in the left side of the Tin Woodman's breast. Then, going to a chest
of drawers, he took out a pretty heart, made entirely of silk and
stuffed with sawdust.
"Isn't it a beauty?" he asked.
"It is, indeed!" replied the Woodman, who was greatly pleased.
"But is it a kind heart?"
"Oh, very!" answered Oz. He put the heart in the Woodman's breast
and then replaced the square of tin, soldering it neatly together
where it had been cut.
"There," said he. "Now you have a heart that any man might be
proud of. I'm sorry I had to put a patch on your breast, but it really
couldn't be helped."
"Never mind the patch," exclaimed the happy Woodman. "I am very
grateful to you, and shall never forget your kindness."
"Don't speak of it," replied Oz.
Then the Tin Woodman went back to his friends, who wished him
every joy on account of his good fortune.
The Lion now walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.
"Come in," said Oz.
"I have come for my courage," announced the Lion, entering the room.
"Very well," answered the little man. "I will get it for you."
He went to a cupboard and reaching up to a high shelf took down a
square green bottle, the contents of which he poured into a green-gold
dish, beautifully carved. Placing this before the Cowardly Lion, who
sniffed at it as if he did not like it, the Wizard said:
"Drink."
"What is it?" asked the Lion.
"Well," answered Oz, "if it were inside of you, it would be courage.
You know, of course, that courage is always inside one; so that this
really cannot be called courage until you have swallowed it. Therefore
I advise you to drink it as soon as possible."
The Lion hesitated no longer, but drank till the dish was empty.
"How do you feel now?" asked Oz.
"Full of courage," replied the Lion, who went joyfully back to his
friends to tell them of his good fortune.
Oz, left to himself, smiled to think of his success in giving the
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion exactly what they thought
they wanted. "How can I help being a humbug," he said, "when all these
people make me do things that everybody knows can't be done? It was
easy to make the Scarecrow and the Lion and the Woodman happy, because
they imagined I could do anything. But it will take more than
imagination to carry Dorothy back to Kansas, and I'm sure I don't know
how it can be done."
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
How the Balloon Was Launched

FOR three days Dorothy heard nothing from Oz. These were sad days
for the little girl, although her friends were all quite happy and
contented. The Scarecrow told them there were wonderful thoughts in
his head, but he would not say what they were because he knew no one
could understand them but himself. When the Tin Woodman walked about
he felt his heart rattling around in his breast, and he told Dorothy
he had discovered it to be a kinder and more tender heart than the one
he had owned when he was made of flesh. The Lion declared he was
afraid of nothing on earth, and would gladly face an army of men or
a dozen of the fierce Kalidahs.
Thus each of the little party was satisfied except Dorothy, who
longed more than ever to get back to Kansas.
On the fourth day, to her great joy, Oz sent for her, and when she
entered the Throne Room he greeted her pleasantly.
"Sit down, my dear. I think I have found the way to get you out of
this country."
"And back to Kansas?" she asked eagerly.
"Well, I'm not sure about Kansas," said Oz, "for I haven't the
faintest notion which way it lies. But the first thing to do is to
cross the desert, and then it should be easy to find your way home."
"How can I cross the desert?" she inquired.
"Well, I'll tell you what I think," said the little man "You see,
when I came to this country it was in a balloon. You also came through
the air, being carried by a cyclone. So I believe the best way to
get across the desert will be through the air. Now, it is quite beyond
my powers to make a cyclone. But I've been thinking the matter over,
and I believe I can make a balloon."
"How?" asked Dorothy.
"A balloon," said Oz, "is made of silk, which is coated with glue to
keep the gas in it. I have plenty of silk in the Palace, so it will be
no trouble to make the balloon. But in all this country there is no
gas to fill the balloon with, to make it float."
"If it won't float," remarked Dorothy, "it will be of no use to us."
"True," answered Oz. "But there is another way to make it float,
which is to fill it with hot air. Hot air isn't as good as gas, for if
the air should get cold the balloon would come down in the desert, and
we should be lost."
"We!" exclaimed the girl. "Are you going with me?"
"Yes, of course," replied Oz. "I am tired of being such a humbug. If
I should go out of this Palace my people would soon discover I am
not a Wizard, and then they would be vexed with me for having deceived
them. So I have to stay shut up in these rooms all day, and it gets
tiresome. I'd much rather go back to Kansas with you and be in a
circus again."
"I shall be glad to have your company," said Dorothy.
"Thank you," he answered. "Now, if you will help me sew the silk
together, we will begin to work on our balloon."
So Dorothy took a needle and thread, and as fast as Oz cut the
strips of silk into proper shape the girl sewed them neatly
together. First there was a strip of light green silk, then a strip of
dark green and then a strip of emerald green; for Oz had a fancy to
make the balloon in different shades of the color about them. It
took three days to sew all the strips together, but when it was
finished they had a big bag of green silk more than twenty feet long.
Then Oz painted it on the inside with a coat of thin glue, to make
it airtight, after which he announced that the balloon was ready.
"But we must have a basket to ride in," he said. So he sent the
soldier with the green whiskers for a big clothes basket, which he
fastened with many ropes to the bottom of the balloon.
When it was all ready, Oz sent word to his people that he was
going to make a visit to a great brother Wizard who lived in the
clouds. The news spread rapidly throughout the city and everyone
came to see the wonderful sight.
Oz ordered the balloon carried out in front of the Palace, and the
people gazed upon it with much curiosity. The Tin Woodman had
chopped a big pile of wood, and now he made a fire of it, and Oz
held the bottom of the balloon over the fire so that the hot air
that arose from it would be caught in the silken bag. Gradually the
balloon swelled out and rose into the air, until finally the basket
just touched the ground.
Then Oz got into the basket and said to all the people in a loud
voice, "I am now going away to make a visit. While I am gone the
Scarecrow will rule over you. I command you to obey him as you would
me."
The balloon was by this time tugging hard at the rope that held it
to the ground, for the air within it was hot, and this made it so much
lighter in weight than the air without that it pulled hard to rise
into the sky.
"Come, Dorothy!" cried the Wizard. "Hurry up, or the balloon will
fly away."
"I can't find Toto anywhere," replied Dorothy, who did not wish to
leave her little dog behind. Toto had run into the crowd to bark at
a kitten, and Dorothy at last found him. She picked him up and ran
toward the balloon.
She was within a few steps of it, and Oz was holding out his hands
to help her into the basket, when, crack! went the ropes, and the
balloon rose into the air without her.
"Come back!" she screamed. "I want to go, too!"
"I can't come back, my dear," called Oz from the basket. "Good-by!"
"Good-by!" shouted everyone, and all eyes were turned upward to
where the Wizard was riding in the basket, rising every moment farther
and farther into the sky.
And that was the last any of them ever saw of Oz, the Wonderful
Wizard, though he may have reached Omaha safely, and be there now, for
all we know. But the people remembered him lovingly.
"Oz was always our friend," they said to one another. "When he was
here he built for us this beautiful Emerald City, and now he is gone
he has left the Wise Scarecrow to rule over us."
Still, for many days they grieved over the loss of the Wonderful
Wizard, and would not be comforted.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Away to the South

DOROTHY wept bitterly at the passing of her hope to get home to
Kansas again; but when she thought it all over she was glad she had
not gone up in a balloon. And she also felt sorry at losing Oz, and so
did her companions.
The Tin Woodman came to her and said:
"Truly I should be ungrateful if I failed to mourn for the man who
gave me my lovely heart. I should like to cry a little because Oz is
gone, if you will kindly wipe away my tears, so that I shall not
rust."
"With pleasure," she answered, and brought a towel at once. Then the
Tin Woodman wept for several minutes, and she watched the tears
carefully and wiped them away with the towel. When he had finished, he
thanked her kindly and oiled himself thoroughly with his jeweled
oilcan, to guard against mishap.
The Scarecrow was now the ruler of the Emerald City, and although he
was not a Wizard the people were proud of him. "For," they said,
"there is not another city in all the world that is ruled by a stuffed
man." And, so far as they knew, they were quite right.
The morning after the balloon had gone up with Oz, the four
travelers met in the Throne Room and talked matters over. The
Scarecrow sat in the big throne and the others stood respectfully
before him.
"We are not so unlucky," said the new ruler, "for this Palace and
the Emerald City belong to us, and we can do just as we please. When I
remember that a short time ago I was up on a pole in a farmer's
cornfield, and that now I am the ruler of this beautiful City, I am
quite satisfied with my lot."
"I also," said the Tin Woodman, "am well-pleased with my new
heart; and, really, that was the only thing I wished in all the
world."
"For my part, I am content in knowing I am as brave as any beast
that ever lived, if not braver," said the Lion modestly.
"If Dorothy would only be content to live in the Emerald City,"
continued the Scarecrow, "we might all be happy together."
"But I don't want to live here," cried Dorothy. "I want to go to
Kansas, and live with Aunt Em and Uncle Henry."
"Well, then, what can be done?" inquired the Woodman.
The Scarecrow decided to think, and he thought so hard that the pins
and needles began to stick out of his brains.
Finally he said, "Why not call the Winged Monkeys, and ask them to
carry you over the desert?"
"I never thought of that!" said Dorothy joyfully. "It's just the
thing. I'll go at once for the Golden Cap."
When she brought it into the Throne Room she spoke the magic
words, and soon the band of Winged Monkeys flew in through the open
window and stood beside her.
"This is the second time you have called us," said the Monkey
King, bowing before the little girl. "What do you wish?"
"I want you to fly with me to Kansas," said Dorothy.
But the Monkey King shook his head.
"That cannot be done," he said. "We belong to this country alone,
and cannot leave it. There has never been a Winged Monkey in Kansas
yet, and I suppose there never will be, for they don't belong there.
We shall be glad to serve you in any way in our power, but we cannot
cross the desert. Good-by."
And with another bow, the Monkey King spread his wings and flew away
through the window, followed by all his band.
Dorothy was ready to cry with disappointment. "I have wasted the
charm of the Golden Cap to no purpose," she said, "for the Winged
Monkeys cannot help me."
"It is certainly too bad!" said the tender-hearted Woodman.
The Scarecrow was thinking again, and his head bulged out so
horribly that Dorothy feared it would burst.
"Let us call in the soldier with the green whiskers," he said,
"and ask his advice."
So the soldier was summoned and entered the Throne Room timidly, for
while Oz was alive he never was allowed to come farther than the door.
"This little girl," said the Scarecrow to the soldier, "wishes to
cross the desert. How can she do so?"
"I cannot tell," answered the soldier, "for nobody has ever
crossed the desert, unless it is Oz himself."
"Is there no one who can help me?" asked Dorothy earnestly.
"Glinda might," he suggested.
"Who is Glinda?" inquired the Scarecrow.
"The Witch of the South. She is the most powerful of all the
Witches, and rules over the Quadlings. Besides, her castle stands on
the edge of the desert, so she may know a way to cross it."
"Glinda is a Good Witch, isn't she?" asked the child.
"The Quadlings think she is good," said the soldier, "and she is
kind to everyone. I have heard that Glinda is a beautiful woman, who
knows how to keep young in spite of the many years she has lived."
"How can I get to her castle?" asked Dorothy.
"The road is straight to the South," he answered, "but it is said to
be full of dangers to travelers. There are wild beasts in the woods,
and a race of queer men who do not like strangers to cross their
country. For this reason none of the Quadlings ever come to the
Emerald City."
The soldier then left them and the Scarecrow said:
"It seems, in spite of dangers, that the best thing Dorothy can do
is to travel to the Land of the South and ask Glinda to help her. For,
of course, if Dorothy stays here she will never get back to Kansas."
"You must have been thinking again," remarked the Tin Woodman.
"I have," said the Scarecrow.
"I shall go with Dorothy," declared the Lion, "for I am tired of
your city and long for the woods and the country again. I am really
a wild beast, you know. Besides, Dorothy will need someone to
protect her."
"That is true," agreed the Woodman. "My axe may be of service to
her; so I also will go with her to the Land of the South."
"When shall we start?" asked the Scarecrow.
"Are you going?" they asked, in surprise.
"Certainly. If it wasn't for Dorothy I should never have had brains.
She lifted me from the pole in the cornfield and brought me to the
Emerald City. So my good luck is all due to her, and I shall never
leave her until she starts back to Kansas for good and all."
"Thank you," said Dorothy gratefully. "You are all very kind to
me. But I should like to start as soon as possible."
"We shall go tomorrow morning," returned the Scarecrow. "So now
let us all get ready, for it will be a long journey."
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Attacked by the Fighting Trees

THE next morning Dorothy kissed the pretty green girl good-by, and
they all shook hands with the soldier with the green whiskers, who had
walked with them as far as the gate. When the Guardian of the Gates
saw them again, he wondered greatly that they could leave the
beautiful City to get into new trouble. But he at once unlocked
their spectacles, which he put back into the green box, and gave
them many good wishes to carry with them.
"You are now our ruler," he said to the Scarecrow. "So you must come
back to us as soon as possible."
"I certainly shall if I am able," the Scarecrow replied. "But I must
help Dorothy to get home, first."
As Dorothy bade the good-natured Guardian a last farewell she said:
"I have been very kindly treated in your lovely City, and everyone
has been good to me. I cannot tell you how grateful I am."
"Don't try, my dear," he answered. "We should like to keep you
with us, but if it is your wish to return to Kansas, I hope you will
find a way." He then opened the gate of the outer wall, and they
walked forth and started upon their journey.
The sun shone brightly as our friends turned their faces toward
the Land of the South. They were all in the best of spirits, and
laughed and chatted together. Dorothy was once more filled with the
hope of getting home, and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were
glad to be of use to her. As for the Lion, he sniffed the fresh air
with delight and whisked his tail from side to side in pure joy at
being in the country again, while Toto ran around them and chased
the moths and butterflies, barking merrily all the time.
"City life does not agree with me at all," remarked the Lion, as
they walked along at a brisk pace. "I have lost much flesh since I
lived there, and now I am anxious for a chance to show the other
beasts how courageous I have grown."
They now turned and took a last look at the Emerald City. All they
could see was a mass of towers and steeples behind the green walls,
and high up above everything the spires and dome of the Palace of Oz.
"Oz was not such a bad Wizard, after all," said the Tin Woodman,
as he felt his heart rattling around in his breast.
"He knew how to give me brains, and very good brains, too," said the
Scarecrow.
"If Oz had taken a dose of the same courage he gave me," added the
Lion, "he would have been a brave man."
Dorothy said nothing. Oz had not kept the promise he made her, but
he had done his best. So she forgave him. As he said, he was a good
man, even if he was a bad Wizard.
The first day's journey was through the green fields and bright
flowers that stretched about the Emerald City on every side. They
slept that night on the grass, with nothing but the stars over them;
and they rested very well indeed.
In the morning they traveled on until they came to a thick wood.
There was no way of going around it, for it seemed to extend to the
right and left as far as they could see. Besides, they did not dare
change the direction of their journey for fear of getting lost. So
they looked for the place where it would be easiest to get into the
forest.
The Scarecrow, who was in the lead, finally discovered a big tree
with such wide-spreading branches that there was room for the party to
pass underneath. So he walked forward to the tree, but just as he came
under the first branches they bent down and twined around him, and the
next minute he was raised from the ground and flung headlong among his
fellow travelers.
This did not hurt the Scarecrow, but it surprised him, and he looked
rather dizzy when Dorothy picked him up.
"Here is another space between the trees," called the Lion.
"Let me try it first," said the Scarecrow, "for it doesn't hurt me
to get thrown about." He walked up to another tree, as he spoke, but
its branches immediately seized him and tossed him back again.
"This is strange," exclaimed Dorothy. "What shall we do?"
"The trees seem to have made up their minds to fight us, and stop
our journey," remarked the Lion.
"I believe I will try it myself," said the Woodman, and
shouldering his axe, he marched up to the first tree that had
handled the Scarecrow so roughly. When a big branch bent down to seize
him the Woodman chopped at it so fiercely that he cut it in two. At
once the tree began shaking all its branches as if in pain, and the
Tin Woodman passed safely under it.
"Come on!" he shouted to the others. "Be quick!"
They all ran forward and passed under the tree without injury,
except Toto, who was caught by a small branch and shaken until he
howled. But the Woodman promptly chopped off the branch and set the
little dog free.
The other trees of the forest did nothing to keep them back, so they
made up their minds that only the first row of trees could bend down
their branches, and that probably these were the policemen of the
forest, and given this wonderful power in order to keep strangers
out of it.
The four travelers walked with ease through the trees until they
came to the farther edge of the wood. Then, to their surprise, they
found before them a high wall which seemed to be made of white
china. It was smooth, like the surface of a dish, and higher than
their heads.
"What shall we do now?" asked Dorothy.
"I will make a ladder," said the Tin Woodman, "for we certainly must
climb over the wall."
CHAPTER TWENTY
The Dainty China Country

WHILE the Woodman was making a ladder from wood which he found in
the forest Dorothy lay down and slept, for she was tired by the long
walk. The Lion also curled himself up to sleep, and Toto lay beside
him.
The Scarecrow watched the Woodman while he worked, and said to
him, "I cannot think why this wall is here, nor what it is made of."
"Rest your brains and do not worry about the wall," replied the
Woodman. "When we have climbed over it, we shall know what is on the
other side."
After a time the ladder was finished. It looked clumsy, but the
Tin Woodman was sure it was strong and would answer their purpose. The
Scarecrow waked Dorothy and the Lion and Toto, and told them that
the ladder was ready. The Scarecrow climbed up the ladder first, but
he was so awkward that Dorothy had to follow close behind and keep him
from falling off. When he got his head over the top of the wall the
Scarecrow said, "Oh, my!"
"Go on," exclaimed Dorothy.
So the Scarecrow climbed farther up and sat down on the top of the
wall, and Dorothy put her head over and cried, "Oh, my!" just as the
Scarecrow had done.
Then Toto came up, and immediately began to bark, but Dorothy made
him be still.
The Lion climbed the ladder next, and the Tin Woodman came last; but
both of them cried, "Oh, my!" as soon as they looked over the wall.
When they were all sitting in a row on the top of the wall, they
looked down and saw a strange sight.
Before them was a great stretch of country having a floor as
smooth and shining and white as the bottom of a big platter. Scattered
around were many houses made entirely of china and painted in the
brightest colors. These houses were quite small, the biggest of them
reaching only as high as Dorothy's waist. There were also pretty
little barns, with china fences around them. Many cows and sheep and
horses and pigs and chickens, all made of china, were standing about
in groups.
But the strangest of all were the people who lived in this queer
country. There were milkmaids and shepherdesses, with brightly colored
bodices and golden spots all over their gowns; and princesses with
most gorgeous frocks of silver and gold and purple; and shepherds
dressed in knee breeches with pink and yellow and blue stripes down
them, and golden buckles on their shoes; and princes with jeweled
crowns upon their heads, wearing ermine robes and satin doublets;
and funny clowns in ruffled gowns, with round red spots upon their
cheeks and tall, pointed caps. And, strangest of all, these people
were all made of china, even to their clothes, and were so small
that the tallest of them was no higher than Dorothy's knee.
No one did so much as look at the travelers at first, except one
little purple china dog with an extra-large head, which came to the
wall and barked at them in a tiny voice, afterward running away again.
"How shall we get down?" asked Dorothy.
They found the ladder so heavy they could not pul it up, so the
Scarecrow fell off the wall and the others jumped down upon him so
that the hard floor would not hurt their feet. Of course they took
pains not to light on his head and get the pins in their feet. When
all were safely down they picked up the Scarecrow, whose body was
quite flattened out, and patted his straw into shape again.
"We must cross this strange place in order to get to the other
side," said Dorothy, "for it would be unwise for us to go any other
way except due South."
They began walking through the country of the china people, and
the first thing they came to was a china milkmaid milking a china cow.
As they drew near, the cow suddenly gave a kick and kicked over the
stool, the pail, and even the milkmaid herself, and all fell on the
china ground with a great clatter.
Dorothy was shocked to see that the cow had broken her short leg
off, and that the pail was lying in several small pieces, while the
poor milkmaid had a nick in her left elbow.
"There!" cried the milkmaid angrily. "See what you have done! My cow
has broken her leg, and I must take her to the mender's shop and
have it glued on again. What do you mean by coming here and
frightening my cow?"
"I'm very sorry," returned Dorothy. "Please forgive us."
But the pretty milkmaid was much too vexed to make any answer. She
picked up the leg sulkily and led her cow away, the poor animal
limping on three legs. As she left them the milkmaid cast many
reproachful glances over her shoulder at the clumsy strangers, holding
her nicked elbow close to her side.
Dorothy was quite grieved at this mishap.
"We must be very careful here," said the kind-hearted Woodman, "or
we may hurt these pretty little people so they will never get over
it."
A little farther on Dorothy met a most beautifully dressed young
Princess, who stopped short as she saw the strangers and started to
run away.
Dorothy wanted to see more of the Princess, so she ran after her.
But the china girl cried out, "Don't chase me! Don't chase me!"
She had such a frightened little voice that Dorothy stopped and
said, "Why not?"
"Because," answered the Princess, also stopping, a safe distance
away, "if I run I may fall down and break myself."
"But could you not be mended?" asked the girl.
"Oh, yes; but one is never so pretty after being mended, you
know," replied the Princess.
"I suppose not," said Dorothy.
"Now there is Mr. Joker, one of our clowns," continued the china
lady, "who is always trying to stand upon his head. He has broken
himself so often that he is mended in a hundred places, and doesn't
look at all pretty. Here he comes now, so you can see for yourself."
Indeed, a jolly little clown came walking toward them, and Dorothy
could see that in spite of his pretty clothes of red and yellow and
green he was completely covered with cracks, running every which way
and showing plainly that he had been mended in many places.
The Clown put his hands in his pockets, and after puffing out his
cheeks and nodding his head at them saucily, he said:

"My lady fair,
Why do you stare
At poor old Mr. Joker?
You're quite as stiff
And prim as if
You'd eaten up a poker!"

"Be quiet, sir!" said the Princess. "Can't you see these are
strangers, and should be treated with respect?"
"Well, that's respect, I expect," declared the Clown, and
immediately stood upon his head.
"Don't mind Mr. Joker," said the Princess to Dorothy. "He is
considerably cracked in his head, and that makes him foolish."
"Oh, I don't mind him a bit," said Dorothy. "But you are so
beautiful," she continued, "that I am sure I could love you dearly.
Won't you let me carry you back to Kansas, and stand you on Aunt
Em's mantel? I could carry you in my basket."
"That would make me very unhappy," answered the china Princess. "You
see, here in our country we live contentedly, and can talk and move
around as we please. But whenever any of us are taken away our
joints at once stiffen, and we can only stand straight and look
pretty. Of course that is all that is expected of us when we are on
mantels and cabinets and drawing-room tables, but our lives are much
pleasanter here in our own country."
"I would not make you unhappy for all the world!" exclaimed Dorothy.
"So I'll just say good-by."
"Good-by," replied the Princess.
They walked carefully through the china country. The little
animals and all the people scampered out of their way, fearing the
strangers would break them, and after an hour or so the travelers
reached the other side of the country and came to another china wall.
It was not so high as the first, however, and by standing upon the
Lion's back they all managed to scramble to the top. Then the Lion
gathered his legs under him and jumped on the wall. But just as he
jumped, he upset a china church with his tail and smashed it all to
pieces.
"That was too bad," said Dorothy, "but really I think we were
lucky in not doing these little people more harm than breaking a cow's
leg and a church. They are all so brittle!"
"They are, indeed," said the Scarecrow, "and I am thankful I am made
of straw and cannot be easily damaged. There are worse things in the
world than being a Scarecrow."
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
The Lion Becomes the King of Beasts

AFTER climbing down from the china wall the travelers found
themselves in a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and
covered with tall, rank grass. It was difficult to walk without
falling into muddy holes, for the grass was so thick that it hid
them from sight. However, by carefully picking their way, they got
safely along until they reached solid ground. Here the country
seemed wilder than ever, and after a long and tiresome walk through
the underbrush they entered another forest, where the trees were
bigger and older than any they had ever seen.
"This forest is perfectly delightful," declared the Lion, looking
around him with joy. "Never have I seen a more beautiful place."
"It seems gloomy," said the Scarecrow.
"Not a bit of it," answered the Lion. "I should like to live here
all my life. See how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how
rich and green the moss is that clings to these old trees. Surely no
wild beast could wish a pleasanter home."
"Perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now," said Dorothy.
"I suppose there are," returned the Lion, "but I do not see any of
them about."
They walked through the forest until it became too dark to go any
farther. Dorothy and Toto and the Lion lay down to sleep, while the
Woodman and the Scarecrow kept watch over them as usual.
When morning came, they started again. Before they had gone far they
heard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals. Toto
whimpered a little, but none of the others was frightened, and they
kept along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in
the wood, in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every
variety. There were tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and
foxes and all the others in the natural history, and for a moment
Dorothy was afraid. But the Lion explained that the animals were
holding a meeting, and he judged by their snarling and growling that
they were in great trouble.
As he spoke several of the beasts caught sight of him, and at once
the great assemblage hushed as if by magic.
The biggest of the tigers came up to the Lion and bowed, saying,
"Welcome, O King of Beasts! You have come in good time to fight our
enemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more."
"What is your trouble?" asked the Lion quietly.
"We are all threatened," answered the tiger, "by a fierce enemy
which has lately come into this forest. It is a most tremendous
monster, like a great spider, with a body as big as an elephant and
legs as long as a tree trunk. It has eight of these long legs, and
as the monster crawls through the forest he seizes an animal with a
leg and drags it to his mouth, where he eats it as a spider does a
fly. Not one of us is safe while this fierce creature is alive, and we
had called a meeting to decide how to take care of ourselves when
you came among us."
The Lion thought for a moment.
"Are there any other lions in this forest?" he asked.
"No; there were some, but the monster has eaten them all. And,
besides, they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you."
"If I put an end to your enemy, will you bow down to me and obey
me as King of the Forest?" inquired the Lion.
"We will do that gladly," returned the tiger.
And all the other beasts roared with a mighty roar, "We will!"
"Where is this great spider of yours now?" asked the Lion.
"Yonder, among the oak trees," said the tiger, pointing with his
forefoot.
"Take good care of these friends of mine," said the Lion, "and I
will go at once to fight the monster."
He bade his comrades good-by and marched proudly away to do battle
with the enemy.
The great spider was lying asleep when the Lion found him, and it
looked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust. Its legs
were quite as long as the tiger had said, and its body covered with
coarse black hair. It had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth a
foot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck as
slender as a wasp's waist. This gave the Lion a hint of the best way
to attack the creature. As he knew it was easier to fight it asleep
than awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon the
monster's back. Then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed with
sharp claws, he knocked the spider's head from its body. Jumping down,
he watched it until the long legs stopped wiggling, when he knew it
was quite dead.
The Lion went back to the opening where the beasts of the forest
were waiting for him and said proudly, "You need fear your enemy no
longer."
Then the beasts bowed down to the Lion as their King, and he
promised to come back and rule over them as soon as Dorothy was safely
on her way to Kansas.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
The Country of the Quadlings

THE four travelers passed through the rest of the forest in
safety, and when they came out from its gloom saw before them a
steep hill, covered from top to bottom with great pieces of rock.
"That will be a hard climb," said the Scarecrow, "but we must get
over the hill, nevertheless."
So he led the way and the others followed. They had nearly reached
the first rock when they heard a rough voice cry out, "Keep back!"
"Who are you?" asked the Scarecrow.
Then a head showed itself over the rock and the same voice said,
"This hill belongs to us, and we don't allow anyone to cross it."
"But we must cross it," said the Scarecrow. "We're going to the
country of the Quadlings."
"But you shall not!" replied the voice, and there stepped from
behind the rock the strangest man the travelers had ever seen.
He was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at
the top and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles. But he had
no arms at all, and, seeing this, the Scarecrow did not fear that so
helpless a creature could prevent them from climbing the hill. So he
said, "I'm sorry not to do as you wish, but we must pass over your
hill whether you like it or not," and he walked boldly forward.
As quick as lightning the man's head shot forward and his neck
stretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck the
Scarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over, down the
hill. Almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the body, and
the man laughed harshly as he said, "It isn't as easy as you think!"
A chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and
Dorothy saw hundreds of the armless Hammer-Heads upon the hillside,
one behind every rock.
The Lion became quite angry at the laughter caused by the
Scarecrow's mishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder,
he dashed up the hill.
Again a head shot swiftly out, and the great Lion went rolling
down the hill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball.
Dorothy ran down and helped the Scarecrow to his feet, and the
Lion came up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said, "It is
useless to fight people with shooting heads. No one can withstand
them."
"What can we do, then?" she asked.
"Call the Winged Monkeys," suggested the Tin Woodman. "You have
still the right to command them once more."
"Very well," she answered, and putting on the Quadlings Golden Cap
she uttered the magic words. The Monkeys were as prompt as ever, and
in a few moments the entire band stood before her.
"What are your commands?" inquired the King of the Monkeys, bowing
low.
"Carry us over the hill to the country of the Quadlings," answered
the girl.
"It shall be done," said the King, and at once the Winged Monkeys
caught the four travelers and Toto up in their arms and flew away with
them. As they passed over the hill the Hammer-Heads yelled with
vexation, and shot their heads high in the air, but they could not
reach the Winged Monkeys, which carried Dorothy and her comrades
safely over the hill and set them down in the beautiful country of the
Quadlings.
"This is the last time you can summon us," said the leader to
Dorothy. "So good-by and good luck to you."
"Good-by, and thank you very much," returned the girl. And the
Monkeys rose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling.
The country of the Quadlings seemed rich and happy. There was
field upon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running
between, and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them.
The fences and houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as
they had been painted yellow in the country of the Winkies and blue in
the country of the Munchkins. The Quadlings themselves, who were short
and fat and looked chubby and good-natured, were dressed all in red,
which showed bright against the green grass and the yellowing grain.
The Monkeys had set them down near a farmhouse, and the four
travelers walked up to it and knocked at the door. It was opened by
the farmer's wife, and when Dorothy asked for something to eat the
woman gave them all a good dinner, with three kinds of cake and four
kinds of cookies, and a bowl of milk for Toto.
"How far is it to the Castle of Glinda?" asked the child.
"It is not a great way," answered the farmer's wife. "Take the
road to the South and you will soon reach it.
Thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the
fields and across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a very
beautiful Castle. Before the gates were three young girls, dressed
in handsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid.
As Dorothy approached, one of them said to her, "Why have you come
to the South Country?"
"To see the Good Witch who rules here," she answered. "Will you take
me to her?"
"Let me have your name, and I will ask Glinda if she will receive
you." They told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the
Castle. After a few moments she came back to say that Dorothy and
the others were to be admitted at once.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Glinda Grants Dorothy's Wish

BEFORE they went to see Glinda, however, they were taken to a room
of the Castle, where Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair,
and the Lion shook the dust out of his mane, and the Scarecrow
patted himself into his best shape, and the Woodman polished his tin
and oiled his joints.
When they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier
girl into a big room where the Witch Glinda sat upon a throne of
rubies.
She was both beautiful and young to their eyes. Her hair was a
rich red in color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders. Her
dress was pure white but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly
upon the little girl.
"What can I do for you, my child?" she asked.
Dorothy told the Witch all her story: how the cyclone had brought
her to the Land of Oz, how she had found her companions, and of the
wonderful adventures they had met with.
"My greatest wish now," she added, "is to get back to Kansas, for
Aunt Em will surely think something dreadful has happened to me, and
that will make her put on mourning. And unless the crops are better
this year than they were last, I am sure Uncle Henry cannot afford
it."
Glinda leaned forward and kissed the sweet, upturned face of the
loving little girl.
"Bless your dear heart," she said, "I am sure I can tell you of a
way to get back to Kansas." Then she added, "But if I do, you must
give me the Golden Cap."
"Willingly!" exclaimed Dorothy. "Indeed, it is of no use to me
now, and when you have it you can command the Winged Monkeys three
times."
"And I think I shall need their service just those three times,"
answered Glinda, smiling.
Dorothy then gave her the Golden Cap, and the Witch said to the
Scarecrow, "What will you do when Dorothy has left us?"
"I will return to the Emerald City," he replied, "for Oz has made me
its ruler and the people like me. The only thing that worries me is
how to cross the hill of the Hammer-Heads."
"By means of the Golden Cap I shall command the Winged Monkeys to
carry you to the gates of the Emerald City," said Glinda, "for it
would be a shame to deprive the people of so wonderful a ruler."
"Am I really wonderful?" asked the Scarecrow.
"You are unusual," replied Glinda.
Turning to the Tin Woodman, she asked, "What will become of you when
Dorothy leaves this country?"
He leaned on his axe and thought a moment. Then he said, "The
Winkies were very kind to me, and wanted me to rule over them after
the Wicked Witch died. I am fond of the Winkies. If I could get back
again to the Country of the West, I should like nothing better than to
rule over them forever."
"My second command to the Winged Monkeys," said Glinda "will be that
they carry you safely to the land of the Winkies. Your brain may not
be so large to look at as those of the Scarecrow, but you are really
brighter than he is- when you are well polished- and I am sure you
will rule the Winkies wisely and well."
Then the Witch looked at the big, shaggy Lion and asked, "When
Dorothy has returned to her own home, what will become of you?"
"Over the hill of the Hammer-Heads," he answered, "lies a grand
old forest, and all the beasts that live there have made me their
King. If I could only get back to this forest, I would pass my life
very happily there."
"My third command to the Winged Monkeys," said Glinda, "shall be
to carry you to your forest. Then, having used up the powers of the
Golden Cap, I shall give it to the King of the Monkeys, that he and
his band may thereafter be free for evermore."
The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion now thanked the
Good Witch earnestly for her kindness.
Then Dorothy exclaimed, "You are certainly as good as you are
beautiful! But you have not yet told me how to get back to Kansas."
"Your Silver Shoes will carry you over the desert," replied
Glinda. "If you had known their power you could have gone back to your
Aunt Em the very first day you came to this country."
"But then I should not have had my wonderful brains!" cried the
Scarecrow. "I might have passed my whole life in the farmer's
cornfield."
"And I should not have had my lovely heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"I might have stood and rusted in the forest till the end of the
world."
"And I should have lived a coward forever," declared the Lion,
"and no beast in all the forest would have had a good word to say to
me."
"This is all true," said Dorothy, "and I am glad I was of use to
these good friends. But now that each of them has had what he most
desired, and each is happy in having a kingdom to rule beside, I think
I should like to go back to Kansas."
"The Silver Shoes," said the Good Witch, "have wonderful powers. And
one of the most curious things about them is that they can carry you
to any place in the world in three steps, and each step will be made
in the wink of an eye. All you have to do is to knock the heels
together three times and command the shoes to carry you wherever you
wish to go."
"If that is so," said the child joyfully, "I will ask them to
carry me back to Kansas at once."
She threw her arms around the Lion's neck and kissed him, patting
his big head tenderly. Then she kissed the Tin Woodman, who was
weeping in a way most dangerous to his joints. But she hugged the
soft, stuffed body of the Scarecrow in her arms instead of kissing his
painted face, and found she was crying herself at this sorrowful
parting from her loving comrades.
Glinda the Good stepped down from her ruby throne to give the little
girl a good-by kiss, and Dorothy thanked her for all the kindness
she had shown to her friends and herself.
Dorothy now took Toto up solemnly in her arms, and having said one
last good-by she clapped the heels of her shoes together three times.
"Take me home to Aunt Em!"
Instantly she was whirling through the air, so swiftly that all
she could see or feel was the wind whistling past her ears.
The Silver Shoes took but three steps, and then she stopped so
suddenly that she rolled over upon the grass several times before
she knew where she was.
At length, however, she sat up and looked about her.
"Good gracious!" she cried.
For she was sitting on the broad Kansas prairie, and just before her
was the new farmhouse Uncle Henry built after the cyclone had
carried away the old one. Uncle Henry was milking the cows in the
barnyard, and Toto had jumped out of her arms and was running toward
the barn, barking joyously.
Dorothy stood up and found she was in her stocking-feet. For the
Silver Shoes had fallen off in her flight through the air, and were
lost forever in the desert.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Home Again

AUNT EM had just come out of the house to water the cabbages when
she looked up and saw Dorothy running toward her.
"My darling child!" she cried, folding the little girl in her arms
and covering her face with kisses. "Where in the world did you come
from?"
"From the Land of Oz," said Dorothy gravely. "And here is Toto, too.
And oh, Aunt Em! I'm so glad to be at home again!"


THE END
THE WAR OF THE WORLDS
      Contents

Book One -- THE COMING OF THE MARTIANS

1.  The Eve of the War
2.  The Falling Star
3.  On Horsell Common
4.  The Cylinder Opens
5.  The Heat-Ray
6.  The Heat-Ray in Chobham Road
7.  How I Reached Home
8.  Friday Night
9.  The Fighting Begins
0.  In the Storm
1.  At the Window
2.  What I Saw of the Destruction of Weybridge and Shepperton
3.  How I Fell in with the Curate
4.  In London
5.  What Had Happened in Surrey
6.  The Exodus from London
7.  The "Thunder Child"

Book Two -- THE EARTH UNDER THE MARTIANS

1.  Under Foot
2.  What We Saw from the Ruined House
3.  The Days of Imprisonment
4.  The Death of the Curate
5.  The Stillness
6.  The Work of Fifteen Days
7.  The Man on Putney Hill
8.  Dead London
9.  Wreckage
0.  The Epilogue

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1
Chapter 1:  The Eve of the War

No one would have believed in the last years of the nineteenth
century that this world was being watched keenly and closely by
intelligences greater than man's and yet as mortal as his own; that
as men busied themselves about their various concerns they were
scrutinised and studied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a
microscope might scrutinise the transient creatures that swarm and
multiply in a drop of water.  With infinite complacency men went to
and fro over this globe about their little affairs, serene in their
assurance of their empire over matter.  It is possible that the
infusoria under the microscope do the same.  No one gave a thought to
the older worlds of space as sources of human danger, or thought of
them only to dismiss the idea of life upon them as impossible or
improbable.  It is curious to recall some of the mental habits of
those departed days.  At most, terrestrial men fancied there might be
other men upon Mars, perhaps inferior to themselves and ready to
welcome a missionary enterprise.  Yet across the gulf of space, minds
that are to our minds as ours are to those of the beasts that perish,
intellects vast and cool and unsympathetic, regarded this earth with
envious eyes, and slowly and surely drew their plans against us.  And
early in the twentieth century came the great disillusionment.

The planet Mars, I scarcely need remind the reader, revolves
about the sun at a mean distance of 140,000,000 miles, and the light
and heat it receives from the sun is barely half of that received by
this world.  It must be, if the nebular hypothesis has any truth,
older than our world; and long before this earth ceased to be molten,
life upon its surface must have begun its course.  The fact that it
is scarcely one seventh of the volume of the earth must have
accelerated its cooling to the temperature at which life could begin.
It has air and water and all that necessary for the support of
animated existence.

Yet so vain is man, and so blinded by his vanity, that no
writer, up to the very end of the nineteenth century, expressed any
idea that intelligent life might have developed there far, or indeed
at all, beyond its earthly level.  Nor was it generally understood
that since Mars is older than our earth, with scarcely a quarter of
the superficial area and remoter from the sun, it necessarily follows
that it is not only more distant from life's beginning but nearer its
end.

The secular cooling that must someday overtake our planet has
already gone far indeed with our neighbour.  Its physical condition
is still largely a mystery, but we know now that even in its
equatorial region the midday temperature barely approaches that of
our coldest winter.  Its air is much more attenuated than ours, its
oceans have shrunk until they cover but a third of its surface, and
as its slow seasons change huge snowcaps gather and melt about either
pole and periodically inundate its temperate zones.  That last stage
of exhaustion, which to us is still incredibly remote, has become a
present-day problem for the inhabitants of Mars.  The immediate
pressure of necessity has brightened their intellects, enlarged their
powers, and hardened their hearts.  And looking across space with
instruments, and intelligences such as we have scarcely dreamed of,
they see, at its nearest distance only 35,000,000 of miles sunward of
them, a morning star of hope, our own warmer planet, green with
vegetation and grey with water, with a cloudy atmosphere eloquent of
fertility, with glimpses through its drifting cloud wisps of broad
stretches of populous country and narrow, navy-crowded seas.

And we men, the creatures who inhabit this earth, must be to
them at least as alien and lowly as are the monkeys and lemurs to us.
The intellectual side of man already admits that life is an incessant
struggle for existence, and it would seem that this too is the belief
of the minds upon Mars.  Their world is far gone in its cooling and
this world is still crowded with life, but crowded only with what
they regard as inferior animals.  To carry warfare sunward is,
indeed, their only escape from the destruction that, generation after
generation, creeps upon them.

And before we judge of them too harshly we must remember what
ruthless and utter destruction our own species has wrought, not only
upon animals, such as the vanished bison and the dodo, but upon its
inferior races.  The Tasmanians, in spite of their human likeness,
were entirely swept out of existence in a war of extermination waged
by European immigrants, in the space of fifty years.  Are we such
apostles of mercy as to complain if the Martians warred in the same
spirit?

The Martians seem to have calculated their descent with amazing
subtlety--their mathematical learning is evidently far in excess of
ours--and to have carried out their preparations with a well-nigh
perfect unanimity.  Had our instruments permitted it, we might have
seen the gathering trouble far back in the nineteenth century.  Men
like Schiaparelli watched the red planet--it is odd, by-the-bye, that
for countless centuries Mars has been the star of war--but failed to
interpret the fluctuating appearances of the markings they mapped so
well.  All that time the Martians; must have been getting ready.

During the opposition of 1894 a great light was seen on the
illuminated part of the disk, first at the Lick Observatory, then by
Perrotin of Nice, and then by other observers.  English readers heard
of it first in the issue of Nature dated August 2.  I am inclined to
think that this have been the casting of the huge gun, in the vast
pit sunk into their planet, from which their shots were fired at us.
Peculiar markings, as yet unexplained, were seen near the site of
that outbreak during the next two oppositions.

The storm burst upon us six years ago now.  As Mars approached
opposition, Lavelle of Java set the wires of the astronomical
exchange palpitating with the amazing intelligence of a huge outbreak
of incandescent gas upon the planet.  It had occurred towards
midnight of the twelfth; and the spectroscope, to which he had at
once resorted, indicated a mass of flaming gas, chiefly hydrogen,
moving with an enormous velocity towards this earth.  This jet of
fire had become invisible about a quarter past twelve.  He compared
it to a colossal puff of flame suddenly and violently squirted out of
the planet, "as flaming gases rushed out of a gun."

A singularly appropriate phrase it proved.  Yet the next day
there was nothing of this in the papers except a little note in the
Daily Telgraph, and the world went in ignorance of one of the gravest
dangers that ever threatened the human race.  I might not have heard
of the eruption at all had I not met Ogilvy, the well-known
astronomer, at Ottershaw.  He was immensely excited at the news, and
in the excess of his feelings invited me up to take a turn with him
that night in a scrutiny of the red planet.

In spite of all that has happened since, I still remember that
vigil very distinctly: the black and silent observatory, the shadowed
lantern throwing a feeble glow upon the floor in the corner, the
steady ticking of the clockwork of the telescope, the little slit in
the roof--an oblong profundity with the stardust streaked across it.
Ogilvy moved about, invisible but audible.  Looking through the
telescope, one saw a circle of deep blue and the little round planet
swimming in the field.  It seemed such a little thing, so bright and
small and still faintly marked with transverse stripes, and slightly
flattened from the perfect round.  But so little it was, so silvery
warm--a pin's-head of light!  It was as if it quivered, but really
this was the telescope vibrating with the activity of the clockwork
that kept the planet in view.

As I watched, the planet seemed to grow larger and smaller and to
advance and recede, but that was simply that my eye was tired.  Forty
millions of miles it was from us--more than forty millions of miles
of void.  Few people realise the immensity of vacancy in which the
dust of the material universe swims.

Near it in the field, I remember, were three faint points of
light, three telescopic stars infinitely remote, and all around it
was the unfathomable darkness of empty space.  You know how that
blackness looks on a frosty starlight night in a telescope it seems
far profounder.  And invisible to me because it was so remote and
small, flying swiftly and steadily towards me across that incredible
distance, drawing nearer every minute by so many thousands of miles,
came the Thing they were sending us, the Thing that was to bring so
much struggle and calamity and death to the earth.  I never dreamed
of it then as I watched; no one on earth dreamed of that unerring
missile.

That night, too, there was another jetting out of gas from the
distant planet.  I saw it.  A reddish flash at the edge, the
slightest projection of the outline just as the chronometer struck
midnight; and at that I told Ogilvy and he took my place.  The night
was warm and I was thirsty, and I went, stretching my legs clumsily
and feeling my way in the darkness, to the little table where the
siphon stood, while Ogilvy exclaimed at the streamer of gas that came
out towards us.

That night another invisible missile started on its way to the
earth from Mars, just a second or so under twenty-four hours after
the first one.  I remember how I sat on the table there in the
blackness, with patches of green and crimson swimming before my eyes.
I wished I had a light to smoke by, little suspecting the meaning of
the minute gleam I had seen and all that it would presently bring me.
Olgivy watched till one, and then gave it up; and we lit the lantern
and walked over to his house.  Down below in the darkness were
Ottershaw and Chertsey and all their hundreds of people, sleeping in
peace.

He was full of speculation that night about the condition of
Mars, and scoffed at the vulgar idea of its having inhabitants who
were signalling us.  His idea was that meteorites might be falling in
a heavy shower upon the planet, or that a huge volcanic explosion was
in progress.  He pointed out to me how unlikely it was that organic
evolution had taken the same direction in the two adjacent planets.

"The chances against anything manlike on Mars are a million to
one," he said.

Hundreds of observers saw the flame that night and the night
after about midnight, and again the night after; and so for ten
nights, a flame each night.  Why the shots ceased after the tenth no
one on earth has attempted to explain.  It may be the gases of the
firing caused the Martians inconvenience.  Dense clouds of smoke or
dust, visible through a powerful telescope on earth as little grey,
fluctuating patches, spread through the clearness of the planet's
atmosphere and obscured its more familiar features.

Even the daily papers woke up to the disturbances at last, and
popular notes appeared here, there, and everywhere concerning the
volcanoes upon Mars.  The serio-comic periodical Punch, I remember,
made a happy use of it in the political cartoon.  And, all
unsuspected, those missiles the Martians had fired at us drew
earthward, rushing now at a pace of many miles a second through the
empty gulf of space, hour by hour and day by day, nearer and nearer.
It seems to me now almost incredibly wonderful that, with that swift
fate hanging over us, men could go about their petty concerns as they
did.  I remember how jubilant Markham was at securing a new
photograph of the planet for the illustrated paper he edited in those
days.  People in these latter times scarcely realise the abundance
and enterprise of our nineteenth-century papers.  For my own part, I
was much occupied in learning to ride the bicycle, and busy upon a
series of papers discussing the fprobable developments of moral ideas
as civilisation progressed.

One night (the first missile then could scarcely have been
10,000,000 miles away) I went for a walk with my wife.  It was
starlight, and I explained the Signs of the Zodiac to her, and
pointed out Mars, a bright dot of light creeping zenithward, towards
which so many telescopes were pointed.  It was a warm night.  Coming
home, a party of excursionists from Chertsey or Isleworth passed us
singing and playing music.  There were lights in the upper windows of
the houses as the people went to bed.  From the railway station in
the distance came the sound of shunting trains, ringing and rumbling,
softened almost into melody by the distance.  My wife pointed out to
me the brightness of the red, green, and yellow signal lights hanging
in a framework against the sky.  It seemed so safe and tranquil.

 THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1
  Chapter 2:  The Falling Star

Then came the night of the first falling star.  It was seen early in
the morning, rushing over Winchester eastward, a line of flame high
in the atmosphere.  Hundreds must have seen it, and taken it for an
ordinary falling star.  Albin described it as leaving a greenish
streak behind it that glowed for some seconds.  Denning, our greatest
authority on meteorites, stated that the height of its first
appearance was about ninety or one hundred miles.  It seemed to him
that it fell to earth about one hundred miles east of him.

I was at home at that hour and writing in my study; and although
my French windows face towards Ottershaw and the blind was up (for I
loved in those days to look up at the night sky), I saw nothing of
it.  Yet this strangest of all things that ever came to earth from
outer space must have fallen while I was sitting there, visible to me
had I only looked up as it passed.  Some of those who saw its flight
say it travelled with a hissing sound.  I myself heard nothing of
that.  Many people in Berkshire, Surrey, and Middlesex must have seen
the fall of it, and, at most, have thought that another meteorite had
descended.  No one seems to have troubled to look for the fallen mass
that night.

But very early in the morning poor Ogilvy, who had seen the
shooting star and who was persuaded that a meteorite lay somewhere on
the common between Horsell, Ottershaw, and Woking, rose early with
the idea of finding it.  Find it he did, soon after dawn, and not far
from the sand pits.  An enormous hole had been made by the impact of
the projectile, and the sand and gravel had been flung violently in
every direction over the heath, forming heaps visible a mile and a
half away.  The heather was on fire eastward, and a thin blue smoke
rose against the dawn.

The Thing itself lay almost entirely buried in sand, amidst the
scattered splinters of a fir tree it had shivered to fragments in its
descent.  The uncovered part had the appearance of a huge cylinder,
caked over and its outline softened by a thick scaly dun-coloured
incrustation.  It had a diameter of about thirty yards.  He
approached the mass, surprised at the size and more so at the shape,
since most meteorites are rounded more or less completely.  It was,
however, still so hot from its flight through the air as to forbid
his near approach.  A stirring noise within its cylinder he ascribed
to the unequal cooling of its surface; for at that time it had not
occurred to him that it might be hollow.

He remained standing at the edge of the pit that the Thing had
made for itself, staring at its strange appearance, astonished
chiefly at its unusual shape and colour, and dimly perceiving even
then some evidence of design in its arrival.  The early morning was
wonderfully still, and the sun, just clearing the pine trees towards
Weybridge, was already warm.  He did not remember hearing any birds
that morning, there was certainly no breeze stirring, and the only
sounds were the faint movements from within the cindery cylinder.  He
was all alone on the common.

Then suddenly he noticed with a start that some of the grey
clinker, the ashy incrustation that covered the meteorite, was
falling off the circular edge of the end.  It was dropping off in
flakes and raining down upon the sand.  A large piece suddenly came
off and fell with a sharp noise that brought his heart into his
mouth.

For a minute he scarcely realised what this meant, and, although
the heat was excessive, he clambered down into the pit close to the
bulk to see the Thing more clearly.  He fancied even then that the
cooling of the body might account for this, but what disturbed that
idea was the fact that the ash was failing only from the end of the
cylinder.

And then he perceived that, very slowly, the circular top of the
cylinder was rotating on its body.  It was such a gradual movement
that he discovered it only through noticing that a black mark that
had been near him five minutes ago was now at the other side of the
circumference.  Even then he scarcely understood what this indicated,
until he heard a muffled grating sound and saw the black mark jerk
forward an inch or so.  Then the thing came upon him in a flash.  The
cylinder was artificial--hollow--with an end that screwed out!
Something within the cylinder was unscrewing the top!

"Good heavens!" said Ogilvy. "There's a man in it--men in it!
Half roasted to death!  Trying to escape!"

At once, with a quick mental leap, he linked the Thing with the
flash upon Mars.

The thought of the confined creature was so dreadful to him that
he forgot the heat, and went forward to the cylinder to help turn.
But luckily the dull radiation arrested him before he could burn his
hands on the still glowing metal.  At that he stood irresolute for a
moment, then turned, scrambled out of the pit, and set off running
wildly into Woking.  The time then must have been somewhere about six
o'clock.  He met a waggoner and tried to make him understand, but the
tale he told and his appearance were so wild--his hat had fallen off
in the pit--that the man simply drove on.  He was equally
unsuccessful with the pot man who was just unlocking the doors of the
public-house by Horsell Bridge.  The fellow thought he was a lunatic
at large and made an unsuccessful attempt to shut him into the
taproom.  That sobered him a little; and when he saw Henderson, the
London journalist, in his garden, he called over the palings and made
himself understood.

"Henderson," he called, "you saw that shooting star last night?"

"Well?" said Henderson

"It's out on Horsell Common now."

"Good Lord!" said Henderson.  "Fallen meteorite!  That's good."

"But it's something more than a meteorite.  It's a cylinder-- an
artificial cylinder, man!  And there's something inside."

Henderson stood up with his spade in his hand.

"What's that?" he said.  He was deaf in one ear.

Ogilvy told him all that he had seen.  Henderson was a minute or
so taking it in.  Then he dropped his spade, snatched up his jacket,
and came out into the road.  The two men hurried back at once to the
common, and found the cylinder still lying in the same position.  But
now the sounds inside had ceased, and a thin circle of bright metal
showed between the top and the body of the cylinder.  Air was either
entering or escaping at the rim with a thin, sizzling sound.

They listened, rapped on the scaly burnt metal with a stick,
and, meeting with no response, they both concluded the man or men
inside must be insensible or dead.

Of course the two were quite unable to do anything.  They
shouted consolation and promises, and went off back to the town again
to get help.  One can imagine them, covered with sand, excited and
disordered, running up the little street in the bright sunlight just
as the shop folks were taking down their shutters and people were
opening their bedroom windows.  Henderson went into the railway
station at once, in order to telegraph the news to London.  The
newspaper articles had prepared men's minds for the reception of the
idea.

By eight o'clock a number of boys and unemployed men had already
started for the common to see the "dead men from Mars."  That was the
form the story took.  I heard of it first from my newspaper boy about
a quarter to nine when I went out to get my Daily Chronicle.  I was
naturally startled, and lost no time in going out and across the
Ottershaw bridge to the sand pits.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 3: On Horsell Common

I found a little crowd of perhaps twenty people surrounding the
huge hole in which the cylinder lay.  I have already described the
appearance of that colossal bulk, embedded in the ground.  The turf
and gravel about it seemed charred as if by a sudden explosion.  No
doubt its impact had caused a flash of fire.  Henderson and Ogilvy
were not there.  I think they perceived that nothing was to be done
for the present, and had gone away to breakfast at Henderson's house.

There were four or five boys sitting on the edge of the pit,
with their feet dangling, and amusing themselves until I stopped
them--by throwing stones at the giant mass.  After I had spoken to
them about it, they began playing at "touch" in and out of the group
of bystanders.

Among these were a couple of cyclists, a jobbing gardener I
employed sometimes, a girl carrying a baby, Gregg the butcher and his
little boy, and two or three loafers and golf caddies who were
accustomed to hang about the railway station.  There was very little
talking.  Few of the common people in England had anything but the
vaguest astronomical ideas in those days.  Most of them were standing
quietly at the big tablelike end of the cylinder, which was still as
Ogilvy and Henderson had left it.  I fancy the popular expectation of
a heap of charred corpses was disappointed at this inanimate bulk.
Some went away while I was there, and other people came.  I clambered
into the pit and fancied I heard a faint movement under my feet.  The
top had certainly ceased to rotate.

It was only when I got thus close to it that the strangeness of
this object was at all evident to me.  At the first glance it was
really no more exciting than an overturned carriage or a tree blown
across the road.  Not so much so, indeed.  It looked like a rusty gas
float.  It required a certain amount of scientific education to
perceive that the grey scale of the Thing was no common oxide, that
the yellowish-white metal that gleamed in the crack between the lid
and the cylinder had an unfamiliar hue.  "Extraterrestrial" had no
meaning for most of the onlookers.

At that time it was quite clear in my own mind that the Thing
had come from the planet Mars, but I judged it improbable that it
contained any living creature.  I thought the unscrewing might be
automatic.  In spite of Ogilvy, I still believed that there were men
in Mars.  My mind ran fancifully on the possibilities of its
containing manuscript, on the difficulties in translation that might
arise, whether we should find coins and models in it, and so forth.
Yet it was a little too large for assurance on this idea.  I felt an
impatience to see it opened.  About eleven, as nothing seemed
happening, I walked back, full of such thought, to my home in
Maybury.  But I found it difficult to get to work upon my abstract
investigations.

In the afternoon the appearance of the common had altered very
much.  The early editions of the evening papers had startled London
with enormous headlines:

A MESSAGE RECEIVED FROM MARS

REMARKABLE STORY FROM WOKING

and so forth.  In addition, Ogilvy's wire to the Astronomical
Exchange had roused every observatory in the three kingdoms.

There were half a dozen flies or more from the Woking station
standing in the road by the sand pits, a basket-chaise from Chobham,
and a rather lordly carriage.  Besides that, there was quite a heap
of bicycles.  In addition, a large number of people must have walked,
in spite of the heat of the day, from Woking and Chertsey, so that
there was altogether quite a considerable crowd--one or two gaily
dressed ladies among the others.

It was glaringly hot, not a cloud in the sky nor a breath of
wind, and the only shadow was that of the few scattered pine trees.
The burning heather had been extinguished, but the level ground
towards Ottershaw was blackened as far as one could see, and still
giving off vertical streamers of smoke.  An enterprising sweet-stuff
dealer in the Chobham Road had sent up his son with a barrow-load of
green apples and ginger beer.

Going to the edge of the pit, I found it occupied by a group of
about half a dozen men--Henderson, Ogilvy, and a tall, fair-haired
man that I afterwards learned was Stent, the Astronomer Royal, with
several workmen, wielding spades and pickaxes.  Stent was giving
directions in a clear, high-pitched voice.  He was standing on the
cylinder, which was now evidently much cooler; his face was crimson
and streaming with perspiration, and something seemed to have
irritated him.

A large portion of the cylinder had been uncovered, though its
lower end was still embedded.  As soon as Ogilvy saw me among the
staring crowd on the edge of the pit he called to me to come down,
and asked me if I would mind going over to see Lord Hilton, the lord
of the manor.

The growing crowd, he said, was becoming a serious impediment to
their excavations, especially the boys.  They wanted a light railing
put up, and help to keep the people back.  He told me that a faint
stirring was occasionally still audible within the case, but that the
workmen had failed to unscrew the top, as it afforded no grip to
them.  The case appeared to be enormously thick, and it was possible
that the faint sounds we heard represented a noisy tumult in the
interior.

I was very glad to do as he asked, and so become one of the
privileged spectators within the contemplated enclosure.  I failed to
find Lord Hilton at his house, but I was told he was expected from
London by the six o'clock train from Waterloo; and as it was then
about a quarter past five, I went home, had some tea, and walked up
to the station to waylay him.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 4: The Cylinder Opens

When I returned to the common the sun was setting.  Scattered
groups were hurrying from the direction of Woking, and one or two
persons were returning.  The crowd about the pit had increased, and
stood out black against the lemon yellow of the sky--a couple of
hundred people, perhaps.  There were raised voices, and some sort of
struggle appeared to be going on about the pit.  Strange imaginings
passed through my mind.  As I drew nearer I heard Stent's voice:

"Keep back!  Keep back!"

A boy came running towards me.

"Its a movin'," he said to me as he passed; "a-screwin' and
a-screwin' out.  I don't like it.  I'm a-goin' home, I am."

I went on to the crowd.  There were really, I should think, two
or three hundred people elbowing and jostling one another, the one or
two ladies there being by no means the least active.

"He's fallen in the pit!" cried some one.

"Keep back!" said several.

The crowd swayed a little, and I elbowed my way through.  Every
one seemed greatly excited.  I heard a peculiar humming sound from
the pit.

"I say!" said Ogilvy; "help keep these idiots back.  We don't
know what's in the confounded thing, you know!"

I saw a young man, a shop assistant in Woking I believe he was,
standing on the cylinder and trying to scramble out of the hole
again.  The crowd had pushed him in.

The end of the cylinder was being screwed but from within.
Nearly two feet of shining screw projected.  Somebody blundered
against me, and I narrowly missed being pitched onto the top of the
screw.  I turned, and as I did so the screw must have come out, for
the lid of the cylinder fell upon the gravel with a ringing
concussion. I stuck my elbow into the person behind me, and turned my
head towards the Thing again.  For a moment that circular cavity
seemed perfectly black. I had the sunset in my eyes.

I think everyone expected to see a man emerge--possibly
something a little unlike us terrestrial men, but in all essentials a
man.  I know I did.  But, looking, I presently saw something stirring
within the shadow: greyish billowy movements, one above another, and
then two luminous disks--like eyes.  Then something resembling a
little grey snake, about the thickness of a walking stick, coiled up
out of the writhing middle, and wriggled in the air towards me--and
then another.

A sudden chill came over me.  There was a loud shriek from a
woman behind.  I half turned, keeping my eyes fixed upon the cylinder
still, from which other tentacles were now projecting, and began
pushing my way back from the edge of the pit.  I saw astonishment
giving place to horror on the faces of the people about me.  I heard
inarticulate exclamations on all sides.  There was a general movement
backwards.  I saw the shopman struggling still on the edge of the
pit.  I found myself alone, and saw the people on the other side of
the pit running off, Stent among them.  I looked again at the
cylinder, and ungovernable terror gripped me.  I stood petrified and
staring.

A big greyish rounded bulk, the size, perhaps, of a bear, was
rising slowly and painfully out of the cylinder.  As it bulged up and
caught the light, it glistened like wet leather.

Two large dark-coloured eyes were regarding me steadfastly.  The
mass that framed them, the head of the thing, was rounded, and had,
one might say, a face.  There was a mouth under the eyes, the lipless
brim of which quivered and panted, and dropped saliva.  The whole
creature heaved and pulsated convulsively.  A lank tentacular
appendage gripped the edge of the cylinder, another swayed in the
air.

Those who have never seen a living Martian can scarcely imagine
the strange horror of its appearance.  The peculiar V-shaped mouth
with its pointed upper lip, the absence of brow ridges, the absence
of a chin beneath the wedgelike lower lip, the incessant quivering of
this mouth, the Gorgon groups of tentacles, the tumultuous breathing
of the lungs in a strange atmosphere, the evident heaviness and
painfulness of movement due to the greater gravitational energy of
the earth--above all, the extraordinary intensity of the immense
eye--were at once vital, intense, inhuman, crippled and monstrous.
There was something fungoid in the oily brown skin, something in the
clumsy deliberation of the tedious movements unspeakably nasty.  Even
at this first encounter, this first glimpse, I was overcome with
disgust and dread.

Suddenly the monster vanished.  It had toppled over the brim of
the cylinder and fallen into the pit, with a thud like the fall of a
great mass of leather.  I heard it give a peculiar thick cry, and
forthwith another of these creatures appeared darkly in the deep
shadow of the aperture.

I turned and, running madly, made for the first group of trees,
perhaps a hundred yards away; but I ran slantingly and stumbling, for
I could not avert my face from these things.

There, among some young pine trees and furze bushes, I stopped,
panting, and waited further developments.  The common round the sand
pits was dotted with people, standing like myself in a
half-fascinated terror, staring at these creatures, or rather at the
heaped gravel at the edge of the pit in which they lay.  And then,
with a renewed horror, I saw a round, black object bobbing up and
down on the edge of the pit.  It was the head of the shopman who had
fallen in, but showing as a little black object against the hot
western sky.  Now he got his shoulder and knee up, and again he
seemed to slip back until only his head was visible.  Suddenly he
vanished, and I could have fancied a faint shriek had reached me.  I
had a momentary impulse to go back and help him that my fears
overruled.

Everything was then quite invisible, hidden by the deep pit and
the heap of sand that the fall of the cylinder had made.  Anyone
coming along the road from Choban or Woking would have been amazed at
the sight--a dwindling multitude of perhaps a hundred people or more
standing in a great irregular circle, in ditches, behind bushes,
behind gates and hedges, saying little to one another and that in
short, excited shouts, and staring, staring hard at a few heaps of
sand.  The barrow of ginger beer stood, a queer derelict, black
against the burning sky, and in the sand pits was a row of deserted
vehicles with their horses feeding out of nosebags or pawing the
ground.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 5: The Heat-Ray

After the glimpse I had had of the Martians emerging from the
cylinder in which they had come to the earth from their planet, a
kind of fascination paralysed my actions.  I remained standing
knee-deep in the heather, staring at the mound that hid them.  I was
a battleground of fear and curiosity.

I did not dare to go back towards the pit, but I felt a
passionate longing to peer into it.  I began walking, therefore, in a
big curve, seeking some point of vantage and continually looking at
the sand heaps that hid these newcomers to our earth.  Once a leash
of thin black whips, like the arms of an octopus, flashed across the
sunset and was immediately withdrawn, and afterwards a thin rod rose
up, joint by joint, bearing at its apex a circular disk that spun
with a wobbling motion.  What could be going on there?

Most of the spectators had gathered in one or two groups--one a
little crowd towards Woking, the other a knot of people in the
direction of Chobham.  Evidently they shared my mental conflict.
There were few near me.  One man I approached--he was, I perceived, a
neighbour of mine, though I did not know his name-- and accosted.
But it was scarcely a time for articulate conversation.

"What ugly brutes!" he said. "Good God!  What ugly brutes!"  He
repeated this over and over again.

"Did you see a man in the pit?" I said; but he made no answer to
that.  We became silent, and stood watching for a time side by side,
deriving, I fancy, a certain comfort in one another's company.  Then
I shifted my position to a little knoll that gave me the advantage of
a yard or more of elevation, and when I looked for him presently he
was walking towards Woking.

The sunset faded to twilight before anything further happened.
The crowd far away on the left, towards Woking, seemed to grow, and I
heard now a faint murmur from it.  The little knot of people towards
Chobham dispersed.  There was scarcely an intimation of movement from
the pit.

It was this, as much as anything, that gave people courage, and
I suppose the new arrivals from Woking also helped to restore
confidence.  At any rate, as the dusk came on a slow, intermittent
movement upon the sand pits began, a movement that seemed to gather
force as the stillness of the evening about the cylinder remained
unbroken.  Vertical black figures in twos and threes would advance,
stop, watch, and advance again, spreading out as they did so in a
thin irregular crescent that promised to enclose the pit in its
attenuated horns.  I, too, on my side began to move towards the pit.

Then I saw some cabmen and others had walked boldly into the
sand pits, and heard the clatter of hoofs and the gride of wheels.  I
saw a lad trundling off the barrow of apples.  And then, within
thirty yards of the pit, advancing from the direction of Horsell, I
noted a little black knot of men, the foremost of whom was waving a
white flag.

This was the Deputation.  There had been a hasty consultation,
and since the Martians were evidently, in spite of their repulsive
forms, intelligent creatures, it had been resolved to show them, by
approaching them with signals, that we too were intelligent.

Flutter, flutter, went the flag, first to the right, then to the
left.  It was too far for me to recognise anyone there, but
afterwards I learned that Ogilvy, Stent, and Henderson were with
others in this attempt at communication.  This little group had in
its advance dragged inward, so to speak, the circumference of the now
almost complete circle of people, and a number of dim black figures
followed it at discreet distances.

Suddenly there was a flash of light, and a quantity of luminous
greenish smoke came out of the pit in three distinct puffs, which
drove up, one after the other, straight into the still air.

This smoke (or flame, perhaps, would be the better word for it)
was so bright that the deep blue sky overhead and the hazy stretches
of brown common towards Chertsey, set with black pine trees, seemed
to darken abruptly as these puffs arose, and to remain the darker
after their dispersal.  At the same time a faint hissing sound became
audible.

Beyond the pit stood the little wedge of people with the white
flag at its apex, arrested by these phenomena, a little knot of small
vertical black shapes upon the black ground.  As the green smoke
arose, their faces flashed out pallid green, and faded again as it
vanished.  Then slowly the hissing passed into a humming, into a
long, loud, droning noise.  Slowly a humped shape rose out of the
pit, and the ghost of a beam of light seemed to flicker out from it.

Forthwith flashes of actual flame, a bright glare leaping from
one to another, sprang from the scattered group of men.  It was as if
some invisible jet impinged upon them and flashed into white flame.
It was as if each man were suddenly and momentarily turned to fire.

Then, by the light of their own destruction, I saw them
staggering and falling, and their supporters turning to run.

I stood staring, not as yet realising that this was death
leaping from man to man in that little distant crowd.  All I felt was
that it was something very strange.  An almost noiseless and blinding
flash of light, and a man fell headlong and lay still; and as the
unseen shaft of heat passed over them, pine trees burst into fire and
every dry furze bush became with one dull thud a mass of flames.  And
far away towards Knaphill I saw the flashes of trees and hedges and
wooden buildings suddenly set alight.

It was sweeping round swiftly and steadily, this flaming death,
this invisible, inevitable sword of heat.  I perceived it coming
towards me by the flashing bushes it touched, and was too astounded
and stupefied to stir.  I heard the crackle of fire in the sand pits
and the sudden squeal of a horse that was as suddenly stilled.  Then
it was as if an invisible yet intensely heated finger were drawn
through the heather between me and the Martians, and all along a
curving line beyond the sand pits the dark ground smoked and
crackled.  Something fell with a crash far away to the left where the
road from Woking station opens out on the common.  Forthwith the
hissing and humming ceased, and the black, domelike object sank
slowly out of sight into the pit.

All this had happened with such swiftness that I had stood
motionless, dumbfounded and dazzled by the flashes of light.  Had
that death swept through a full circle, it must inevitably have slain
me in my surprise.  But it passed and spared me, and left the night
about me suddenly dark and unfamiliar.

The undulating common seemed now dark almost to blackness,
except where its roadways lay grey and pale under the deep blue sky
of the early night.  It was dark, and suddenly void of men.  Overhead
the stars were mustering, and in the west the sky was still a pale,
bright, almost greenish blue.  The tops of the pine trees and the
roofs of Horsell came out sharp and black against the western
afterglow.  The Martians and their appliances were altogether
invisible, save for that thin mast upon which their restless mirror
wobbled.  Patches of bush and isolated trees here and there smoked
and glowed still, and the houses towards Woking station were sending
up spires of flame into the stillness of the evening air.

Nothing was changed save for that and a terrible astonishment.
The little group of black specks with the flag of white had been
swept out of existence, and the stillness of the evening, so it
seemed to me, had scarcely been broken.

It came to me that I was upon this dark common, helpless,
unprotected, and alone.  Suddenly, like a thing falling upon me from
without, came--fear.

With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run through the
heather.

The fear I felt was no rational fear, but a panic terror not
only of the Martians, but of the dusk and stillness all about me.
Such an extraordinary effect in unmanning me it had that I ran
weeping silently as a child might do.  Once I had turned, I did not
dare to look back.

I remember I felt an extraordinary persuasion that I was being
played with, that presently, when I was upon the very verge of
safety, this mysterious death--as swift as the passage of light--
would leap after me from the pit about the cylinder and strike me
down.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 6: The Heat-Ray in the Chobham Road

It is still a matter of wonder how the Martians are able to slay
men so swiftly and so silently.  Many think that in some way they are
able to generate an intense heat in a chamber of practically absolute
non-conductivity.  This intense heat they project in a parallel beam
against any object they choose, by means of a polished parabolic
mirror of unknown composition, much as the parabolic mirror of a
lighthouse projects a beam of light.  But no one has absolutely
proved these details.  However it is done, it is certain that a beam
of heat is the essence of the matter.  Heat, and invisible, instead
of visible, light.  Whatever is combustible flashes into flame at its
touch, lead runs like water, it softens iron, cracks and melts glass,
and when it falls upon water, incontinently that explodes into steam.

That night nearly forty people lay under the starlight about the
pit charred and distorted beyond recognition, and all night long the
common from Horsell to Maybury was deserted and brightly ablaze.

The news of the massacre probably reached Chobham, Woking, and
Ottershaw about the same time.  In Woking the shops had closed when
the tragedy happened, and a number of people, shop people and so
forth, attracted by the stories they had heard, were walking over the
Horsell Bridge and along the road between the hedges that runs out at
last upon the common.  You may imagine the young people brushed up
after the labours of the day, and making this novelty, as they would
make any novelty, the excuse for walking together and enjoying a
trivial flirtation.  You may figure to yourself the hunt of voices
along the road in the gloaming....

As yet, of course, few people in Woking even knew that the
cylinder had opened, though poor Henderson had sent a messenger on a
bicycle to the post office with a special wire to an evening paper.

As these folks came out by twos and threes upon the open, they
found little knots of people talking excitedly and peering at the
spinning mirror over the sand pits, and the newcomers were, no doubt,
soon infected by the excitement of the occasion.

By half past eight, when the Deputation was destroyed, there may
have been a crowd of three hundred people or more at this place,
besides those who had left the road to approach the Martians nearer.
There were three policemen too, one of whom was mounted, doing their
best, under instructions from Stent, to keep the people back and
deter them from approaching the cylinder.  There was some booing from
those more thoughtless and excitable souls to whom a crowd is always
an occasion for noise and horse-play.

Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating some possibilities of a
collision, had telegraphed from Horsell to the barracks as soon as
the Martians emerged, for the help of a company of soldiers to
protect these strange creatures from violence.  After that they
returned to lead that ill-fated advance.  The description of their
death, as it was seen by the crowd, tallies very closely with my own
impressions: the three puffs of green smoke, the deep humming note,
and the flashes of flame.

But that crowd of people had a far narrower escape than mine.
Only the fact that a hummock of heathery sand intercepted the lower
part of the Heat-Ray saved them.  Had the elevation of the parabolic
mirror been a few yards higher, none could have lived to tell the
tale.  They saw the flashes and the men falling and an invisible
hand, as it were, lit the bushes as it hurried towards them through
the twilight.  Then, with a whistling note that rose above the
droning of the pit, the beam swung close over their heads, lighting
the tops of the beech trees that line the road, and splitting the
bricks, smashing the windows, firing the window frames, and bringing
down in crumbling rain a portion of the gable of the house nearest
the corner.

In the sudden thud, hiss, and glare of the igniting trees, the
panic-stricken crowd seems to have swayed hesitatingly for some
moments.  Sparks and burning twigs began to fall into the road, and
single leaves like puffs of flame.  Hats and dresses caught fire.
Then came a crying from the common.  There were shrieks and shouts,
and suddenly a mounted policeman came galloping through the confusion
with his hands clasped over his head, screaming.

"They're coming!" a woman shrieked, and incontinently everyone
was turning and pushing at those behind, in order to clear their way
to Woking again.  They must have bolted as blindly as a flock of
sheep.  Where the road grows narrow and black between the high banks
the crowd jammed, and a desperate struggle occurred.  All that crowd
did not escape; three persons at least, two women and a little boy,
were crushed and trampled there, and left to die amid the terror and
the darkness.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 7: How I Reached Home

For my own part, I remember nothing of my flight except the
stress of blundering against trees and stumbling through the heather.
All about me gathered the invisible terrors of the Martians; that
pitiless sword of heat seemed whirling to and fro, flourishing
overhead before it descended and smote me out of life.  I came into
the road between the crossroads and Horsell, and ran along this to
the crossroads.

At last I could go no further; I was exhausted with the violence
of my emotion and of my flight, and I staggered and fell by the
wayside.  That was near the bridge that crosses the canal by the
gasworks.  I fell and lay still.

I must have remained there some time.

I sat up, strangely perplexed.  For a moment, perhaps, I could
not clearly understand how I came there.  My terror had fallen from
me like a garment.  My hat had gone, and my collar had burst away
from its fastener.  A few minutes before, there had only been three
real things before me--the immensity of the night and space and
nature, my own feebleness and anguish, and the near approach of
death.  Now it was as if something turned over, and the point of view
altered abruptly.  There was no sensible transition from one state of
mind to the other.  I was immediately the self of every day again--a
decent ordinary citizen.  The silent common, the impulse of my
flight, the starting flames, were as if they had been in a dream.  I
asked myself had these latter things indeed happened?  I could not
credit it.

I rose and walked unsteadily up the steep incline of the bridge.
My mind was blank wonder.  My muscles and nerves seemed drained of
their strength.  I dare say I staggered drunkenly.  A head rose over
the arch, and the figure of a workman carrying a basket appeared.
Beside him ran a little boy.  He passed me, wishing me good night.  I
was minded to speak to him, but did not.  I answered his greeting
with a meaningless mumble and went on over the bridge.

Over the Maybury arch a train, a billowing tumult of white,
firelit smoke, and a long caterpillar of lighted windows, went flying
south--clatter, clatter, clap, rap, and it had gone.  A dim group of
people talked in the gate of one of the houses in the pretty little
row of gables that was called Oriental Terrace.  It was all so real
and so familiar.  And that behind me!  It was frantic, fantastic!
Such things, I told myself, could not be.

Perhaps I am a man of exceptional moods.  I do not know how far
my experience is common.  At times I suffer from the strangest sense
of detachment from myself and the world about me, I seem to watch it
all from the outsider from somewhere inconceivably remote, out of
time, out of space, out of the stress and tragedy of it all.  This
feeling was very strong upon me that night.  Here was another side to
my dream.

But the trouble was the blank incongruity of this serenity and
the swift death flying yonder, not two miles away.  There was a noise
of business from the gasworks, and the electric lamps were all
alight.  I stopped at the group of people.

"What news from the common?" said I.

There were two men and a woman at the gate.

"Eh?" said one of the men, turning.

"What news from the common?" I said.

"Ain't yer just been there?" asked the men.

"People seem fair silly about the common," said the woman over
the gate.  "What's it all abart?"

"Haven't you heard of the men from Mars?" said I; "the creatures
from Mars?"

"Quite enough," said the woman over the gate.  "Thenks"; and all
three of them laughed.

I felt foolish, and angry.  I tried and found I could not tell
them what I had seen.  They laughed again at my broken sentences.

"You'll hear more yet," I said, and went on to my home.

I startled my wife at the doorway, so haggard was I.  I went
into the dining room, sat down, drank some wine, and so soon as I
could collect myself sufficiently I told her the things I had seen.
The dinner, which was a cold one, had already been served, and
remained neglected on the table while I told my story.

"There is one thing," I said, to allay the fears I had aroused;
"they are the most sluggish things I ever saw crawl.  They may keep
the pit and kill people who come near them, but they cannot get out
of it....  But the horror of them!"

"Don't, dear!" said my wife, knitting her brows and putting her
hand on mine.

"Poor Ogilvy!" I said.  "To think he may be lying dead there!"

My wife at least did not find my experience incredible.  When I
saw how deadly white her face was, I ceased abruptly.

"They may come here," she said again and again.

I pressed her to take wine, and tried to reassure her.

"They can scarcely move," I said.

I began to comfort her and myself by repeating all that Ogilvy
had told me of the impossibility of the Martians establishing
themselves on the earth.  In particular I laid stress on the
gravitational difficulty.  On the surface of the earth the force of
gravity is three times what it is on the surface of Mars.  A Martian,
therefore, would weigh three times more on Mars, albeit his muscular
strength would be the same.  His own body would be a cope of lead to
him.  That, indeed, was the general opinion.  Both The Times and the
Daily Telegraph, for instance, insisted on it the next morning, and
both overlooked, just as I did, two obvious modifying influences.

The atmosphere of the earth, we now know, contains far more
oxygen or far less argon (whichever way one likes to put it) than
does Mars.  The invigorating influences of this excess of oxygen upon
the Martians indisputably did much to counterbalance the increased
weight of their bodies.  And, in the second place, we all overlooked
the fact that such mechanical intelligence as the Martian possessed
was quite able to dispense with muscular exertion at a pinch.

But I did not consider these points at the time, and so my
reasoning was dead against the chances of the invaders.  With wine
and food, the confidence of my own table, and the necessity of
reassuring my wife, I grew by insensible degrees courageous and
secure.

"They have done a foolish thing," said I, fingering my
wineglass. "They are dangerous because, no doubt, they are mad with
terror.  Perhaps they expected to find no living things-- certainly
no intelligent living things.

"A shell in the pit," said I, "if the worst comes to the worst,
will kill them all."

The intense excitement of the events had no doubt left my
perceptive powers in a state of erethism.  I remember that dinner
table with extraordinary vividness even now.  My dear wife's sweet
anxious face peering at me from under the pink lamp shade, the white
cloth with its silver and glass table furniture--for in those days
even philosophical writers had many little luxuries-- the crimson
purple wine in my glass, are photographically distinct.  At the end
of it I sat, tempering nuts with a cigarette, regretting Ogilvy's
rashness, and denouncing the shortsighted timidity of the Martians.

So some respectable dodo in the Mauritius might have lorded it
in his nest and discussed the arrival of that shipful of pitiless
sailors in want of animal food.  "We will peck them to death
tomorrow, my dear."

I did not know it, but that was the last civilised dinner I was
to eat for very many strange and terrible days.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 8: Friday Night

The most extraordinary thing to my mind, of all the strange and
wonderful things that happened upon that Friday, was the dovetailing
of the commonplace habits of our social order with the first
beginnings of the series of events that was to topple that social
order headlong.  If on Friday night you had taken a pair of compasses
and drawn a circle with a radius of five miles round the Woking sand
pits, I doubt if you would have had one human being outside it,
unless it were some relation of Stent or of the three or four
cyclists or London people lying dead on the common, whose emotions or
habits were at all affected by the new-comers.  Many people had heard
of the cylinder, of course, and talked about it in their leisure, but
it certainly did not make the sensation that an ultimatum to Germany
would have done.

In London that night poor Henderson's telegram describing the
gradual unscrewing of the shot was judged to be a canard, and his
evening paper, after wiring for authentication from him and receiving
no reply--the man was killed--decided not to print a special edition.

Even within the five-mile circle the great majority of people
were inert.  I have already described the behaviour of the men and
women to whom I spoke.  All over the district people were dining and
supping; working men were gardening after the labours of the day,
children were being put to bed, young people were wandering through
the lanes love-making, students sat over their books.

Maybe there was a murmur in the village streets, a novel and
dominant topic in the public-houses, and here and there a messenger,
or even an eye-witness of the later occurrences, caused a whirl of
excitement, a shouting, and a running to and fro; but for the most
part the daily routine of working, eating, drinking, sleeping, went
on as it had done for countless years--as though no planet Mars
existed in the sky.  Even at Woking station and Horsell and Chobham
that was the case.

In Woking junction, until a late hour, trains were stopping and
going on, others were shunting on the sidings, passengers were
alighting and waiting, and everything was proceeding in the most
ordinary way.  A boy from the town, trenching on Smith's monopoly,
was selling papers with the afternoon's news.  The ringing impact of
trucks, the sharp whistle of the engines from the junction, mingled
with their shouts of "Men from Mars!"  Excited men came into the
station about nine o'clock with incredible tidings, and caused no
more disturbance than drunkards might have done.  People rattling
Londonwards peered into the darkness outside the carriage windows,
and saw only a rare, flickering, vanishing spark dance up from the
direction of Horsell, a red glow and a thin veil of smoke driving
across the stars, and thought that nothing more serious than a heath
fire was happening.  It was only round the edge of the common that
any disturbance was perceptible.  There were half a dozen villas
burning on the Woking border.  There were lights in all the houses on
the common side of the three villages, and the people there kept
awake till dawn.

A curious crowd lingered restlessly, people coming and going but
the crowd remaining, both on the Chobham and Horsell bridges.  One or
two adventurous souls, it was afterwards found, went into the
darkness and crawled quite near the Martians; but they never
returned, for now and again a light-ray, like the beam of a warships'
searchlight, swept the common, and the Heat-Ray was ready to follow.
Save for such, that big area of common was silent and desolate, and
the charred bodies lay about on it all night under the stars, and all
the next day.  A noise of hammering from the pit was heard by many
people.

So you have the state of things on Friday night.  In the centre,
sticking into the skin of our old planet Earth like a poisoned dart,
was this cylinder.  But the poison was scarcely working yet.  Around
it was a patch of silent common, smouldering in places, and with a
few dark, dimly seen objects lying in contorted attitudes here and
there.  Here and there was a burning bush or tree.  Beyond was a
fringe of excitement, and farther than that fringe the inflammation
had not crept as yet.  In the rest of the world the stream of life
still flowed as it had flowed for immemorial years.  The fever of war
that would presently clog vein and artery, deaden nerve and destroy
brain, had still to develop.

All night long the Martians were hammering and stirring,
sleepless, indefatigable, at work upon the machines they were making
ready, and ever and again a puff of greenish-white smoke whirled up
to the starlit sky.

About eleven a company of soldiers came through Horsell, and
deployed along the edge of the common to form a cordon.  Later a
second company marched through Chobham to deploy on the north side of
the common.  Several officers from the Inkerman barracks had been on
the common earlier in the day, and one, Major Eden, was reported to
be missing.  The colonel of the regiment came to the Chobham bridge
and was busy questioning the crowd at midnight.  The military
authorities were certainly alive to the seriousness of the business.
About eleven, the next morning's papers were able to say, a squadron
of hussars, two Maxims, and about four hundred men of the Cardigan
regiment started from Aldershot.

A few seconds after midnight the crowd in the Chertsey road,
Woking, saw a star fall from heaven into the pine woods to the
northwest.  It had a greenish colour, and caused a silent brightness
like summer lightning.  This was the second cylinder.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 9: The Fighting Begins

Saturday lives in my memory as a day of suspense.  It was a day
of lassitude too, hot and close, with, I am told, a rapidly
fluctuating barometer.  I had slept but little, though my wife had
succeeded in sleeping, and I rose early.  I went into my garden
before breakfast and stood listening, but towards the common there
was nothing stirring but a lark.

The milkman came as usual.  I heard the rattle of his chariot,
and I went round to the side gate to ask the latest news.  He told me
that during the night the Martians had been surrounded by troops, and
that guns were expected.

Then--a familiar, reassuring note--I heard a train running
towards Woking.

"They aren't to be killed," said the milkman, "if that can
possibly be avoided."

I saw my neighbour gardening, chatted with him for a time, and
then strolled in to breakfast.  It was a most unexceptional morning.
My neighbour was of opinion that the troops would be able to capture
or to destroy the Martians during the day.

"Its a pity they make themselves so unapproachable," he said.
"It would be curious to know how they live on another planet; we
might learn a thing or two."

He came up to the fence and extended a handful of strawberries,
for his gardening was as generous as it was enthusiastic.  At the
same time he told me of the burning of the pine woods about the
Byfleet Golf Links.

"They say," said he, "that there's another of those blessed
things fallen there--number two.  But one's enough, surely.  This
lot'll cost the insurance people a pretty penny before everything's
settled."  He laughed with an air of the greatest good humour as he
said this.  The woods, he said, were still burning, and pointed out a
haze of smoke to me.  "They will be hot under foot for days, on
account of the thick soil of pine needles and turf," he said, and
then grew serious over "poor Ogilvy."

After breakfast, instead of working, I decided to walk down
towards the common.  Under the railway bridge I found a group of
soldiers--sappers, I think, men in small round caps, dirty red
Jackets unbuttoned, and showing their blue shirts, dark trousers, and
boots coming to the calf.  They told me no one was allowed over the
canal, and, looking along the road towards the bridge, I saw one of
the Gardigan men standing sentinel there.  I talked with these
soldiers for a time; I told them of my sight of the Martians on the
previous evening.  None of them had seen the Martians, and they had
but the vaguest ideas of them, so that they plied me with questions.
They said that they did not know who had authorised the movements of
the troops; their idea was that a dispute had arisen at the Horse
Guards.  The ordinary sapper is a great deal better educated than the
common soldier, and they discussed the peculiar conditions of the
possible fight with some acuteness.  I described the Heat-Ray to
them, and they began to argue among themselves.

"Crawl up under cover and rush 'em, say I," said one.

"Get aht!" said another.  "What's cover against this 'ere 'eat?
Sticks to cook yer!  What we got to do is to go as near as the
ground'll let us, and then drive a trench."

"Blow yer trenches!  You always want trenches; you ought to ha'
been born a rabbit, Snippy."

" 'Ain't they got any necks, then?" said a third, abruptly--a
little, contemplative, dark man, smoking a pipe.

I repeated my description.

"Octopuses," said he, "that's what I calls `em.  Talk about
fishers of men--fighters of fish it is this time!"

"It ain't no murder killing beasts like that," said the first
speaker.

"Why not shell the darned things strite off and finish 'em?"
said the little dark man.  "You carn tell what they might do."

"Where's your shells?" said the first speaker.  "There ain't no
time.  Do it in a rush, that's my tip, and do it at once."

So they discussed it.  After a while I left them, and went on to
the railway station to get as many morning papers as I could.

But I will not weary the reader with a description of that long
morning and of the longer afternoon.  I did not succeed in getting a
glimpse of the common, for even Horsell and Chobham church towers
were in the hands of the military authorities.  The soldiers I
addressed didn't know anything; the officers were mysterious as well
as busy.  I found people in the town quite secure again in the
presence of the military, and I heard for the first time from
Marshall, the tobacconist, that his son was among the dead on the
common.  The soldiers had made the people on the outskirts of Horsell
lock up and leave their houses.

I got back to lunch about two, very tired, for, as I have said,
the day was extremely hot and dull; and in order to refresh myself I
took a cold bath in the afternoon.  About half past four I went up to
the railway station to get an evening paper, for the morning papers
had contained only a very inaccurate description of the killing of
Scent, Henderson, Ogilvy, and the others.  But there was little I
didn't know.  The Martians did not show an inch of themselves.  They
seemed busy in their pit, and there was a sound of hammering and an
almost continuous streamer of smoke.  Apparently they were busy
getting ready for a struggle.  "Fresh attempts have been made to
signal, but without success," was the stereotyped formula of the
papers.  A sapper told me it was done by a man in a ditch with a flag
on a long pole.  The Martians took as much notice of such advances as
we should of the lowing of a cow.

I must confess the sight of all this armament, all this
preparation, greatly excited me.  My imagination became belligerent,
and defeated the invaders in a dozen striking ways; something of my
schoolboy dreams of battle and heroism came back.  It hardly seemed a
fair fight to me at that time.  They seemed very helpless in that pit
of theirs.

About three o'clock there began the thud of a gun at measured
intervals from Chertsey or Addlerstone.  I learned that the
smouldering pine wood into which the second cylinder had fallen was
being shelled, in the hope of destroying that object before it
opened.  It was only about five, however, that a field gun reached
Chobham for use against the first body of Martians.

About six in the evening, as I sat at tea with my wife in the
summerhouse talking vigorously about the battle that was lowering
upon us, I heard a muffled detonation from the common, and
immediately after a gust of firing.  Close on the heels of that came
a violent, rattling crash, quite close to us, that shook the ground;
and, starting out upon the lawn, I saw the tops of the trees about
the Oriental College burst into smoky red flame, and the tower of the
little church beside it slide down into ruin.  The pinnacle of the
mosque had vanished, and the roof line of the college itself looked
as if a hundred-ton gun had been at work upon it.  One of our
chimneys cracked as if a shot had hit it, flew, and a piece of it
came clattering down the tiles and made a heap of broken red
fragments upon the flower bed by my study window.

I and my wife stood amazed.  Then I realised that the crest of
Maybury Hill must be within range of the Martians' Heat-Ray now that
the college was cleared out of the way.

At that I gripped my wife's arm, and without ceremony ran her
out into the road.  Then I fetched out the servant, telling her I
would go upstairs myself for the box she was clamouring for.

"We can't possibly stay here," I said; and as I spoke the firing
reopened for a moment upon the common.

"But where are we to go?" said my wife in terror.

I thought, perplexed.  Then I remembered her cousins at
Leatherhead.

"Leatherhead!" I shouted above the sudden noise.

She looked away from me downhill.  The people were coming out of
their houses, astonished.

"How are we to get to Leatherhead?" she said.

Down the hill I saw a bevy of hussars ride under the railway
bridge; three galloped through the open gates of the Oriental
college; two others dismounted, and began running from house to
house.  The sun, shining through the smoke that drove up from the
tops of the trees, seemed blood red, and threw an unfamiliar lurid
light upon everything.

"Stop here," said I; "you are safe here"; and I started off at
once for the Spotted Dog, for I knew the landlord had a horse and dog
cart.  I ran, for I perceived that in a moment everyone upon this
side of the hill would be moving.  I found him in his bar, quite
unaware of what was going on behind his house.  A man stood with his
back to me, talking to him.

"I must have a pound," said the landlord, "and I've no one to
drive it."

"I'll give you two," said I, over the stranger's shoulder.

"What for?"

"And I'll bring it back by midnight," I said.

"Lord!" said the landlord; "what's the hurry?  I'm selling my
bit of a pig.  Two pounds, and you bring it back?  What's going on
now?"

I explained hastily that I had to leave my home, and so secured
the dog cart.  At the time it did not seem to me nearly so urgent
that the landlord should leave his.  I took care to have the cart
there and then, drove it off down the road, and, leaving it in charge
of my wife and servant, rushed into my house and packed a few
valuables, such plate as we had, and so forth.  The beech trees below
the house were burning while I did this, and the palings up the road
glowed red.  While I was occupied in this way, one of the dismounted
hussars came running up.  He was going from house to house, warning
people to leave.  He was going on as I came out of my front door,
lugging my treasures, done up in a tablecloth.  I shouted after him:

"What news?"

He turned, stared, bawled something about "crawling out in a
thing like a dish cover," and ran on to the gate of the house at the
crest.  A sudden whirl of black smoke driving across the road hid him
for a moment.  I ran to my neighbour's door and rapped to satisfy
myself of what I already knew, that his wife had gone to London with
him and had locked up their house.  I went in again, according to my
promise, to get my servant's box, lugged it out, clapped it beside
her on the tail of the dog cart, and then caught the reins and jumped
up into the driver's seat beside my wife.  In another moment we were
clear of the smoke and noise, and spanking down the opposite slope of
Maybury Hill towards Old Woking.

In front was a quiet, sunny landscape, a wheat field ahead on
either side of the road, and the Maybury Inn with its swinging sign.
I saw the doctor's cart ahead of me.  At the bottom of the hill I
turned my head to look at the hillside I was leaving.  Thick
streamers of black smoke shot with threads of red fire were driving
up into the still air, and throwing dark shadows upon the green
treetops eastward.  The smoke already extended far away to the east
and west--to the Byfleet pine woods eastward, and to Woking on the
west.  The road was dotted with people running towards us.  And very
faint now, but very distinct through the hot, quiet air, one heard
the whirr of a machine-gun that, was presently stilled, and an
intermittent cracking of rifles.  Apparently the Martians were
setting fire to everything within range of their Heat-Ray.

I am not an expert driver, and I had immediately to turn my
attention to the horse.  When I looked back again the second hill had
hidden the black smoke.  I slashed the horse with the whip, and gave
him a loose rein until Woking and Send lay between us and that
quivering tumult.  I overtook and passed the doctor between Woking
and Send.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 10: In the Storm

Leatherhead is about twelve miles from Maybury Hill.  The scent
of hay was in the air through the lush meadows beyond Pyrford, and
the hedges on either side were sweet and gay with multitudes of
dog-roses.  The heavy firing that had broken out while we were
driving down Maybury Hill ceased as abruptly as it began, leaving the
evening very peaceful and still.  We got to Leatherhead without
misadventure about nine o'clock, and the horse had an hour's rest
while I took supper with my cousins and commended my wife to their
care.

My wife was curiously silent throughout the drive, and seemed
oppressed with forebodings of evil.  I talked to her reassuringly,
pointing out that the Martians were tied to the pit by sheer
heaviness, and at the utmost could but crawl a little out of it; but
she answered only in monosyllables.  Had it not been for my promise
to the innkeeper, she would, I think, have urged me to stay in
Leatherhead that night.  Would that I had!  Her face, I remember, was
very white as we parted.

For my own part, I had been feverishly excited all day.
Something very like the war fever that occasionally runs through a
civilised community had got into my blood and in my heart I was not
so very sorry that I had to return to Maybury that night.  I was even
afraid that that last fusillade I had heard might mean the
extermination of our invaders from Mars.  I can best express my state
of mind by saying that I wanted to be in at the death.

It was nearly eleven when I started to return.  The night was
unexpectedly dark; to me, walking out of the lighted passage of my
cousins' house, it seemed indeed black, and it was as hot and close
as the day.  Overhead the clouds were driving fast, albeit not a
breath stirred the shrubs about us.  My cousins' man lit both lamps.
Happily, I knew the road intimately.  My wife stood in the light of
the doorway, and watched me until I jumped up into the dog cart.
Then abruptly she turned and went in, leaving my cousins side by side
wishing me good hap.

I was a little depressed at first, with the contagion of my
wife's fears, but very soon my thoughts reverted to the Martians.  At
that time I was absolutely in the dark as to the course of the
evening's fighting.  I did not know even the circumstances that had
precipitated the conflict.  As I came through Ockham (for that was
the way I returned, and not through Send and Old Woking) I saw along
the western horizon a blood-red glow, which, as I drew nearer, crept
slowly up the sky.  The driving clouds of the gathering thunderstorm
mingled there with masses of black and red smoke.

Ripley Street was deserted, and except for a lighted window or
so the village showed not a sign of life; but I narrowly escaped an
accident at the corner of the road to Pyrford, where a knot of people
stood with their backs to me.  They said nothing to me as I passed.
I do not know what they knew of the things happening beyond the hill,
nor do I know if the silent houses I passed on my way were sleeping
securely, or deserted and empty, or harassed and watching against the
terror of the night.

From Ripley until I came through Pyrford I was in the valley of
the Wey, and the red glare was hidden from me.  As I ascended the
little hill beyond Pyrford Church the glare came into view again, and
the trees about me shivered with the first intimation of the storm
that was upon me.  Then I heard midnight pealing out from Pyrford
Church behind me, and then came the silhouette of Maybury Hill, with
its treetops and roofs black and sharp against the red.

Even as I beheld this a lurid green glare lit the road about me
and showed the distant woods towards Addlestone.  I felt a tug at the
reins.  I saw that the driving clouds had been pierced as it were by
a thread of green fire, suddenly lighting their confusion and falling
into the field to my left.  It was the third falling star!

Close on its apparition, and blindingly violet by contrast,
danced out the first lightning of the gathering storm, and the
thunder burst like a rocket overhead.  The horse took the bit between
his teeth and bolted.

A moderate incline runs towards the foot of Maybury Hill, and
down this we clattered.  Once the lightning had begun, it went on in
as rapid a succession of flashes as I have ever seen.  The
thunderclaps, treading one on the heels of another and with a strange
crackling accompaniment, sounded more like the working of a gigantic
electric machine than the usual detonating reverberations.  The
flickering light was blinding and confusing, and a thin hail smote
gustily at my face as I drove down the slope.

At first I regarded little but the road before me, and then
abruptly my attention was arrested by something that was moving
rapidly down the opposite slope of Maybury Hill.  At first I took it
for the wet roof of a house, but one flash following another showed
it to be in swift rolling movement.  It was an elusive vision--a
moment of bewildering darkness, and then, in a flash like daylight,
the red masses of the Orphanage near the crest of the hill, the green
tops of the pine trees, and this problematical object came out clear
and sharp and bright.

And this Thing I saw!  How can I describe it?  A monstrous
tripod, higher than many houses, striding over the young pine trees,
and smashing them aside in its career; a walking engine of glittering
metal, striding now across the heather; articulate ropes of steel
dangling from it, and the clattering tumult of its passage mingling
with the riot of the thunder.  A flash, and it came out vividly,
heeling over one way with two feet in the air, to vanish and reappear
almost instantly as it seemed, with the next flash, a hundred yards
nearer.  Can you imagine a milking stool tilted and bowled violently
along the ground?  That was the impression those instant flashes
gave.  But instead of a milking stool imagine it a great body of
machinery on a tripod stand.

Then suddenly the trees in the pine wood ahead of me were
parted, as brittle reeds are parted by a man thrusting through them;
they were snapped off and driven headlong, and a second huge tripod
appeared, rushing, as it seemed, headlong towards me.  And I was
galloping hard to meet it!  At the sight of the second monster my
nerve went altogether.  Not stopping to look again, I wrenched the
horse's head hard round to the right, and in another moment the dog
cart had heeled over upon the horse; the shafts smashed noisily, and
I was flung sideways and fell heavily into a shallow pool of water.

I crawled out almost immediately, and crouched, my feet still in
the water, under a clump of furze.  The horse lay motionless (his
neck was broken, poor brute!) and by the lightning flashes I saw the
black bulk of the overturned dog cart and the silhouette of the wheel
still spinning slowly.  In another moment the colossal mechanism went
striding by me, and passed uphill towards Pyrford.

Seen nearer, the Thing was incredibly strange, for it was no
mere insensate machine driving on its way.  Machine it was, with a
ringing metallic pace, and long, flexible, glittering tentacles (one
of which gripped a young pine tree) swinging and rattling about its
strange body.  It picked its road as it went striding along, and the
brazen hood that surmounted it moved to and fro with the inevitable
suggestion of a head looking about.  Behind the main body was a huge
mass of white metal like a gigantic fisherman's basket, and puffs of
green smoke squirted out from the joints of the limbs as the monster
swept by me.  And in an instant it was gone.

So much I saw then, all vaguely for the flickering of the
lightning, in blinding highlights and dense black shadows.

As it passed it set up an exultant deafening howl that drowned
the thunder--"Aloo! Aloo!"--and in another minute it was with its
companion, half a mile away, stooping over something in the field.  I
have no doubt this Thing in the field was the third of the ten
cylinders they had fired at us from Mars.

For some minutes I lay there in the rain and darkness watching,
by the intermittent light, these monstrous beings of metal moving
about in the distance over the hedge tops.  A thin hail was now
beginning, and as it came and went their figures grew misty and then
flashed into clearness again.  Now and then came a gap in the
lightning, and the night swallowed them up.

I was soaked with hail above and puddle water below.  It was
some time before my blank astonishment would let me struggle up the
bank to a drier position, or think at all of my imminent peril.

Not far from me was a little one-roomed squatter's hut of wood,
surrounded by a patch of potato garden.  I struggled to my feet at
last, and, crouching and making use of every chance of cover, I made
a run for this.  I hammered at the door, but I could not make the
people hear (if there were any people inside), and after a time I
desisted, and, availing myself of a ditch for the greater part of the
way, succeeded in crawling, unobserved by these monstrous machines,
into the pine wood towards Maybury.

Under cover of this I pushed on, wet and shivering now, towards
my own house.  I walked among the trees trying to find the footpath.
It was very dark indeed in the wood, for the lightning was now
becoming infrequent, and the hail, which was pouring down in a
torrent, fell in columns through the gaps in the heavy foliage.

If I had fully realised the meaning of all the things I had seen
I should have immediately worked my way round through Byfleet to
Street Cobham, and so gone back to rejoin my wife at Leatherhead.
But that night the strangeness of things about me, and my physical
wretchedness, prevented me, for I was bruised, weary, wet to the
skin, deafened and blinded by the storm.

I had a vague idea of going on to my own house, and that was as
much motive as I had.  I staggered through the trees, fell into a
ditch and bruised my knees against a plant, and finally splashed out
into the lane that ran down from the College Arms.  I say splashed,
for the storm water was sweeping the sand down the hill in a muddy
torrent.  There in the darkness a man blundered into me and sent me
reeling back.

He gave a cry of terror, sprang sideways, and rushed on before I
could gather my wits sufficiently to speak to him.  So heavy was the
stress of the storm just at this place that I had the hardest task to
win my way up the hill.  I went close up to the fence on the left and
worked my way along its palings.

Near the top I stumbled upon something soft, and, by a flash of
lightning, saw between my feet a heap of black broadcloth and a pair
of boots.  Before I could distinguish clearly how the man lay, the
flicker of light had passed.  I stood over him waiting for the next
flash.  When it came, I saw that he was a sturdy man, cheaply but not
shabbily dressed; his head was bent under his body, and he lay
crumpled up close to the fence, as though he had been flung violently
against it.

Overcoming the repugnance natural to one who had never before
touched a dead body, I stooped and turned him over to feel for his
heart.  He was quite dead.  Apparently his neck had been broken.  The
lightning flashed for a third time, and his face leaped upon me.  I
sprang to my feet.  It was the landlord of the Spotted Dog, whose
conveyance I had taken.

I stepped over him gingerly and pushed on up the hill.  I made
my way by the police station and the College Arms towards my own
house.  Nothing was burning on the hillside, though from the common
there still came a red glare and a rolling tumult of ruddy smoke
beating up against the drenching hail.  So far as I could see by the
flashes, the houses about me were mostly uninjured.  By the College
Arms a dark heap lay in the road.

Down the bad towards Maybury Bridge there were voices and the
sound of feet, but I had not the courage to shout or to go to them.
I let myself in with my latchkey, closed, locked and bolted the door,
staggered to the foot of the staircase, and sat down.  My imagination
was full of those striding metallic monsters, and of the dead body
smashed against the fence.

I crouched at the foot of the staircase with my back to the
wall, shivering violently.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 11: At the Window

I have already said that my storms of emotion have a trick of
exhausting themselves.  After a time I discovered that I was cold and
wet, and with little pools of water about me on the stair carpet.  I
got up almost mechanically, vent into the dining room and drank some
whiskey, and then I was moved to change my clothes.

After I had done that I went upstairs to my study, but why I did
so I do not know.  The window of my study looks over the trees and
the railway towards Horsell Common.  In the hurry of our departure
this window had been left open.  The passage was dark, and, by
contrast with the picture the window frame enclosed, the side of the
room seemed impenetrably dark.  I stopped short in the doorway.

The thunderstorm had passed.  The towers of the Oriental College
and the pine trees about it had gone, and very far away, lit by a
vivid red glare, the common about the sand pits was visible.  Across
the light, huge black shapes, grotesque and strange, moved busily to
and fro.

It seemed indeed as if the whole country in that direction was
on fire--a broad hillside set with minute tongues of flame, swaying
and writhing with the gusts of the dying storm, and throwing a red
reflection upon the cloud scud above.  Every now and then a haze of
smoke from some nearer conflagration drove across the window and hid
the Martian shapes.  I could not see what they were doing, nor the
clear form of them, nor recognise the black objects they were busied
upon.  Neither could I see the nearer fire, though the reflections of
it danced on the wall and ceiling of the study.  A sharp, resinous
tang of burning was in the air.

I closed the door noiselessly and crept towards the window.  As
I did so, the view opened out until, on the one hand, it reached to
the houses about Woking station, and on the other to the charred and
blackened pine woods of Byfleet.  There was a light down below the
hill, on the railway, near the arch, and several of the houses along
the Maybury road and the streets near the station were glowing ruins.
The light upon the railway puzzled me at first; there were a black
heap and a vivid glare, and to the right of that a row of yellow
oblongs.  Then I perceived this was a wrecked train, the fore part
smashed and on fire, the hinder carriages still upon the rails.

Between these three main centres of light--the houses, the
train, and the burning country towards Chobham stretched irregular
patches of dark country, broken here and there by intervals of dimly
glowing and smoking ground.  It was the strangest spectacle, that
black expanse set with fire.  It reminded me, more than anything
else, of the Potteries at night.  At first I could distinguish no
people at all, though I peered intently for them.  Later I saw
against the light of Woking station a number of black figures
hurrying one after the other across the line.

And this was the little world in which I had been living
securely for years, this fiery chaos!  What had happened in the last
seven hours I still did not know; nor did I know, though I was
beginning to guess, the relation between these mechanical colossi and
the sluggish lumps I had seen disgorged from the cylinder.  With a
queer feeling of impersonal interest I turned my desk chair to the
window, sat down, and stared at the blackened country, and
particularly at the three gigantic black things that were going to
and fro in the glare about the sand pits.

They seemed amazingly busy.  I began to ask myself what they
could be.  Were they intelligent mechanisms?  Such a thing I felt was
impossible.  Or did a Martian sit within each, ruling, directing,
directing, much as a man's brain sits and rules in his body?  I began
to compare the things to human machines, to ask myself for the first
time in my life how an ironclad or a steam engine would seem to an
intelligent lower animal.

The storm had left the sky clear, and over the smoke of the
burning land the little fading pin point of Mars was dropping into
the west, when a soldier came into my garden.  I heard a slight
scraping at the fence, and rousing myself from the lethargy that had
fallen upon me, I looked down and saw him dimly, clambering over the
palings.  At the sight of another human being my torpor passed, and I
leaned out of the window eagerly.

"Hist!" said I, in a whisper.

He stopped astride of the fence in doubt.  Then he came over and
across the lawn to the corner of the house.  He bent down and stepped
softly.

"Who's there?" he said, also whispering, standing under the
window and peering up.

"Where are you going?" I asked.

"God knows."

"Are you trying to hide?"

"That's it."

"Come into the house," I said.

I went down, unfastened the door, and let him in, and locked the
door again.  I could not see his face.  He was hatless, and his coat
was unbuttoned.

"My God!" he said, as I drew him in.

"What has happened?" I asked.

"What hasn't?"  In the obscurity I could see he made a gesture
of despair.  "They wiped us out--simply wiped us out," he repeated
again and again.

He followed me, almost mechanically, into the dining room.

"Take some whiskey," I said, pouring out a stiff dose.

He drank it.  Then abruptly he sat down before the table, put
his head on his arms, and began to sob and weep like a little boy, in
a perfect passion of emotion, while I, with a curious forgetfulness
of my own recent despair, stood beside him, wondering.

It was a long time before he could steady his nerves to answer
my questions, and then he answered perplexingly and brokenly.  He was
a driver in the artillery, and had only come into action about seven.
At that time firing was going on across the common, and it was said
the first party of Martians were crawling slowly towards their second
cylinder under cover of a metal shield.

Later this shield staggered up on tripod legs and became the
first of the fighting-machines I had seen.  The gun he drove had been
unlimbered near Horsell, in order to command the sand pits, and its
arrival it was that had precipitated the action.  As the limber
gunners went to the rear, his horse trod in a rabbit hole and came
down, throwing him into a depression of the ground.  At the same
moment the gun exploded behind him, the ammunition blew up, there was
fire all about him, and he found himself lying under a heap of
charred dead men and dead horses.

"I lay still," he said, "scared out of my wits, with the fore
quarter of a horse atop of me.  We'd been wiped out.  And the
smell--good Lord!  Like burnt meat!  I was hurt across the back by
the fall of the horse, and there I had to lie until I felt better.
Just like parade it had been a minute before--then stumble, bang,
swish!

"Wiped out!" he said.

He had hid under the dead horse for a long time, peeping out
furtively across the common.  The Cardigan men had tried a rush, in
skirmishing order, at the pit, simply to be swept out of existence.
Then the monster had risen to its feet, and had begun to walk
leisurely to and fro across the common among the few fugitives, with
its headlike hood turning about exactly like the head of a cowled
human being.  A kind of arm carried a complicated metallic case,
about which green flashes scintillated, and out of the funnel of this
there smoked the Heat-Ray.

In a few minutes there was, so far as the soldier could see, not
a living thing left upon the common, and every bush and tree upon it
that was not already a blackened skeleton was burning.  The hussars
had been on the road beyond the curvature of the ground, and he saw
nothing of them.  He heard the Maxims rattle for a time and then
become silent.  The giant saved Woking station and its cluster of
houses until the last; then in a moment the Heat-Ray was brought to
bear, and the town became a heap of fiery ruins.  Then the Thing shut
off the Heat-Ray, and, turning its back upon the artilleryman, began
to waddle away towards the smouldering pine woods that sheltered the
second cylinder.  As it did so a second glittering Titan built itself
up out of the pit.

The second monster followed the first, and at that the
artilleryman began to crawl very cautiously across the hot heather
ash towards Horsell.  He managed to get alive into the ditch by the
side of the road, and so escaped to Woking.  There his story became
ejaculatory.  The place was impassable.  It seems there were a few
people alive there, frantic for the most part, and many burned and
scalded.  He was turned aside by the fire, and hid among some almost
scorching heaps of broken wall as one of the Martian giants returned.
He saw this one pursue a man, catch him up in one of its steely
tentacles, and knock his head against the trunk of a pine tree.  At
last, after nightfall, the artilleryman made a rush for it and got
over the railway embankment.

Since then he had been skulking along towards Maybury, in the
hope of getting out of danger Londonward.  People were hiding in
trenches and cellars, and many of the survivors had made off towards
Woking village and Send.  He had been consumed with thirst until he
found one of the water mains near the railway arch smashed, and the
water bubbling out like a spring upon the road.

That was the story I got from him, bit by bit.  He grew calmer
telling me and trying to make me see the things he had seen.  He had
eaten no food since midday, he told me early in his narrative, and I
found some mutton and bread in the pantry and brought it into the
room.  We lit no lamp for fear of attracting the Martians, and ever
and again our hands would touch upon bread or meat.  As he talked,
things about us came darkly out of the darkness, and the trampled
bushes and broken rose trees outside the window grew distinct.  It
would seem that a number of men or animals had rushed across the
lawn.  I began to see his face, blackened and haggard, as no doubt
mine was also.

When we had finished eating we went softly upstairs to my study,
and I looked again out of the open window.  In one night the valley
had become a valley of ashes.  The fires had dwindled now.  Where
flames had been there were now streamers of smoke; but the countless
ruins of shattered and gutted houses and blasted and blackened trees
that the night had hidden stood out now gaunt and terrible in the
pitiless light of dawn.  Yet here and there some object had had the
luck to escaped--a white railway signal here, the end of a greenhouse
there, white and fresh amid the wreckage.  Never before in the
history of warfare had destruction been so indiscriminate and so
universal.  And shining with the growing light of the east, three of
the metallic giants stood about the pit, their cowls rotating as
though they were surveying the desolation they had made.

It seemed to me that the pit had been enlarged, and ever and
again puffs of vivid green vapour streamed up and out of it towards
the brightening dawn--streamed up, whirled, broke, and vanished.

Beyond were the pillars of fire about Chobham.  They became
pillars of bloodshot smoke at the first touch of day.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1
Chapter 12:  What I Saw of the Destruction of Weybridge and Shepperton

As the dawn grew brighter we withdrew from the window from which
we had watched the Martians, and went very quietly downstairs.

The artilleryman agreed with me that the house was no place to
stay in.  He proposed, he said, to make his way Londonward, and
thence rejoin his battery--No. 12, of the Horse Artillery.  My plan
was to return at once to Leatherhead; and so greatly had the strength
of the Martians impressed me that I had determined to take my wife to
Newhaven, and go with her out of the country forthwith.  For I
already perceived clearly that the country about London must
inevitably be the scene of a disastrous struggle before such
creatures as these could be destroyed.

Between us and Leatherhead, however, lay the third cylinder,
with its guarding giants.  Had I been alone, I think I should have
taken my chance and struck across country.  But the artilleryman
dissuaded me: "Its no kindness to the right sort of wife," he said,
"to make her a widow"; and in the end I agreed to go with him, under
cover of the woods, northward as far as Street Chobham before I
parted with him.  Thence I would make a big detour by Epsom to reach
Leatherhead.

I should have started at once, but my companion had been in
active service and he knew better than that.  He made me ransack the
house for a flask, which he filled with whiskey; and we lined every
available pocket with packets of biscuits and slices of meat.  Then
we crept out of the house, and ran as quickly as we could down the
ill-made road by which I had come overnight.  The houses seemed
deserted.  In the road lay a group of three charred bodies close
together, struck dead by the Heat-Ray; and here and there were things
that people had dropped--a clock, a slipper, a silver spoon, and the
like poor valuables.  At the corner turning up towards the post
office a little cart, filled with boxes and furniture, and horseless,
heeled over on a broken wheel.  A cash box had been hastily smashed
open and thrown under the debris.

Except the lodge at the Orphanage, which was still on fire, none
of the houses had suffered very greatly here.  The Heat-Ray had
shaved the chimney tops and passed.  Yet, save ourselves, there did
not seem to be a living soul on Maybury Hill.  The majority of the
inhabitants had escaped, I suppose, by way of the Old Woking
road--the road I had taken when I drove to Leatherhead or they had
hidden.

We went down the lane, by the body of the man in black, sodden
now from the overnight hail, and broke into the woods at the foot of
the hill.  We pushed through these towards the railway without
meeting a soul.  The woods across the line were but the scarred and
blackened ruins of woods; for the most part the trees had fallen, but
a certain proportion still stood, dismal grey stems, with dark brown
foliage instead of green.

On our side the fire had done no more than scorch the nearer
trees; it had failed to secure its footing.  In one place the woodmen
had been at work on Saturday; trees, felled and freshly trimmed, lay
in a clearing, with heaps of sawdust by the sawing-machine and its
engine.  Hard by was a temporary hut, deserted.  There was not a
breath of wind this morning, and everything was strangely still.
Even the birds were hushed, and as we hurried along I and the
artilleryman talked in whispers and looked now and again over our
shoulders.  Once or twice we stopped to listen.

After a time we drew near the road, and as we did so we heard
the clatter of hoofs and saw through the tree stems three cavalry
soldiers riding slowly towards Woking.  We hailed them, and they
halted while we hurried towards them.  It was a lieutenant and a
couple of privates of the 8th Hussars, with a stand like a
theodolite, which the artilleryman told me was a heliograph.

"You are the first men I've seen coming this way this morning,"
said the lieutenant.  "What's brewing?"

His voice and face were eager.  The men behind him stared
curiously.  The artilleryman jumped down the bank into the road and
saluted.

"Gun destroyed last night, sir.  Have been hiding.  Trying to
rejoin battery, sir.  You'll come in sight of the Martians, I expect,
about half a mile along this road."

"What the dickens are they like?" asked the lieutenant.  "Giants
in armour, sir.  Hundred feet high.  Three legs and a body like
aluminium, with a mighty great head in a hood, sir.

"Get out!" said the lieutenant.  "What confounded nonsense!"

"You'll see, sir.  They carry a kind of box, sir, that shoots
fire and strikes you dead."

"What d'ye mean--a gun?"

"No, sir," and the artilleryman began a vivid account of the
Heat-Ray.  Halfway through, the lieutenant interrupted him and looked
up at me.  I was still standing on the bank by the side of the road.

"It's perfectly true," I said.

"Well," said the lieutenant, "I suppose it's my business to see
it too.  Look here"--to the artilleryman--"we're detailed here
clearing people out of their houses.  You'd better go along and
report yourself to Brigadier-General Marvin, and tell him all you
know.  He's at Weybridge.  Know the way?"

"I do," I said; and he turned his horse southward again.

"Half a mile, you say?" said he.

"At most," I answered, and pointed over the treetops southward.
He thanked me and rode on, and we saw them no more.

Farther along we came upon a group of three women and two
children in the road, busy clearing out a labourer's cottage.  They
had got hold of a little hand truck, and were piling it up with
unclean-looking bundles and shabby furniture.  They were all too
assiduously engaged to talk to us as we passed.

By Byfleet station we emerged from the pine trees, and found the
country calm and peaceful under the morning sunlight.  We were far
beyond the range of the Heat-Ray there, and had it not been for the
silent desertion of some of the houses, the stirring movement of
packing in others, and the knot of soldiers standing on the bridge
over the railway and staring down the line towards Woking, the day
would have seemed very like any other Sunday.

Several farm waggons and carts were moving creakily along the
road to Addlestone, and suddenly through the gate of a field we saw,
across a stretch of flat meadow, six twelve-pounders standing nearly
at equal distances pointing towards Woking.  The gunners stood by the
guns waiting, and the ammunition waggons were at a business-like
distance.  The men stood almost as if under inspection.

"That's, good," said I.  "They will get one fair shot, at any
rate.

The artilleryman hesitated at the gate.

"I shall go on," he said.

Farther on towards Weybridge, just over the bridge, there were a
number of men in white fatigue jackets throwing up a long rampart,
and more guns behind.

"It's bows and arrows against the lightning, anyhow," said the
artilleryman.  "They 'aven't seen that fire-beam yet."

The officers who were not actively engaged stood and stared over
the treetops southwestward, and the men digging would stop every now
and again to stare in the same direction.

Byfleet was in a tumult; people packing, and a score of hussars,
some of them dismounted, some on horseback, were hunting them about.
Three or four black government waggons, with crosses in white
circles, and an old omnibus, among other vehicles, were being loaded
in the village street.  There were scores of people, most of them
sufficiently sabbatical to have assumed their best clothes.  The
soldiers were having the greatest difficulty in making them realise
the gravity of their position.  We saw one shrivelled old fellow with
a huge box and a score or more of flower pots containing orchids,
angrily expostulating with the corporal who would leave them behind.
I stopped and gripped his arm.

"Do you know what's over there?" I said, pointing at the pine
tops that hid the Martians.

"Eh?" said he, turning.  "I was explainin' these is vallyble."

"Death!" I shouted.  "Death is coming!  Death!" and leaving him
to digest that if he could, I hurried on after the artilleryman.  At
the corner I looked back.  The soldier had left him, and he was still
standing by his box, with the pots of orchids on the lid of it, and
staring vaguely over the trees.

No one in Weybridge could tell us where the headquarters were
established; the whole place was in such confusion as I had never
seen in any town before.  Carts, carriages everywhere, the most
astonishing miscellany of conveyances and horseflesh.  The
respectable inhabitants of the place, men in golf and boating
costumes, wives prettily dressed, were packing, river-side loafers
energetically helping, children excited, and, for the most part,
highly delighted at this astonishing variation of their Sunday
experiences.  In the midst of it all the worthy vicar was very
pluckily holding an early celebration, and his bell was jangling out
above the excitement.

I and the artilleryman, seated on the step of the drinking
fountain, made a very passable meal upon what we had brought with us.
Patrols of soldiers--here no longer hussars, but grenadiers in
white--were warning people to move now or to take refuge in their
cellars as soon as the firing began.  We saw as we crossed the
railway bridge that a growing crowd of people had assembled in and
about the railway station, and the swarming platform was piled with
boxes and packages.  The ordinary traffic had been stopped, I
believe, in order to allow of the passage of troops and guns to
Chertsey, and I have heard since that a savage struggle occurred for
places in the special trains that were put on at a later hour.

We remained at Weybridge until midday, and at that hour we found
ourselves at the place near Shepperton Lock where the Wey and Thames
join.  Part of the time we spent helping two old women to pack a
little cart.  The Wey has a treble mouth, and at this point boats are
to be hired, and there was a ferry across the river.  On the
Shepperton side was an inn with a lawn, and beyond that the tower of
Shepperton Church--it has been replaced by a spire--rose above the
trees.

Here we found an excited and noisy crowd of fugitives.  As yet
the flight had not grown to a panic, but there were already far more
people than all the boats going to and fro could enable to cross.
People came panting along under heavy burdens; one husband and wife
were even carrying a small outhouse door between them, with some of
their household goods piled thereon.  One man told us he meant to try
to get away from Shepperton station.

There was a lot of shouting, and one man was even jesting.  The
idea people seemed to have here was that the Martians were simply
formidable human beings, who might attack and sack the town, to be
certainly destroyed in the end.  Every now and then people would
glance nervously across the Wey, at the meadows towards Chertsey, but
everything over there was still.

Across the Thames, except just where the boats landed,
everything was quiet, in vivid contrast with the Surrey side.  The
people who landed there from the boats went tramping off down the
lane.  The big ferryboat had just made a journey.  Three or four
soldiers stood on the lawn of the inn, staring and jesting at the
fugitives, without offering to help.  The inn was closed, as it was
now within prohibited hours.

"What's that?" cried a boatman, and "Shut up, you fool!" said a
man near me to a yelping dog.  Then the sound came again, this time
from the direction of Chertsey, a muffled thud--the sound of a gun.

The fighting was beginning.  Almost immediately unseen batteries
across the river to our right, unseen because of the trees, took up
the chorus, firing heavily one after the other.  A woman screamed.
Everyone stood arrested by the sudden stir of battle, near us and yet
invisible to us.  Nothing was to be seen save flat meadows, cows
feeding unconcernedly for the most part and silvery pollard willows
motionless in the warm sunlight.

"The sojers'll stop 'em," said a woman beside me, doubtfully.  A
haziness rose over the treetops.

Then suddenly we saw a rush of smoke far away up the river, a
puff of smoke that jerked up into the air and hung; and forthwith the
ground heaved under foot and a heavy explosion shook the air,
smashing two or three windows in the houses near, and leaving us
astonished.

"Here they are!" shouted a man in a blue jersey.  "Yonder!
D'yer see them?  Yonder!"

Quickly, one after the other, one, two, three, four of the
armoured Martians appeared, far away over the little trees, across
the flat meadows that stretched towards Chertsey, and striding
hurriedly towards the river.  Little cowled figures they seemed at
first, going with a rolling motion and as fast as flying birds.

Then, advancing obliquely towards us, came a fifth.  Their
armoured bodies glittered in the sun as they swept swiftly forward
upon the guns, growing rapidly larger as they drew nearer.  One on
the extreme left, the remotest that is, flourished a huge case high
in the air, and the ghostly, terrible Heat-Ray I had already seen on
Friday night smote towards Chertsey, and struck the town.

At sight of these strange, swift, and terrible creatures the
crowd near the water's edge seemed to me to be for a moment
horror-struck.  There was no screaming or shouting, but a silence.
Then a hoarse murmur and a movement of feet--a splashing from the
water.  A man, too frightened to drop the portmanteau he carried on
his shoulder, swung round and sent me staggering with a blow from the
corner of his burden.  A woman thrust at me with her hand and rushed
past me.  I turned with the rush of the people, but I was not too
terrified for thought. The terrible Heat-Ray was in my mind.  To get
under water!  That was it!

"Get under water!" I shouted, unheeded.

I faced about again, and rushed towards the approaching Martian,
rushed right down the gravelly beach and headlong into the water.
Others did the same.  A boatload of people putting back came leaping
out as I rushed past.  The stones under my feet were muddy and
slippery, and the river was so low that I ran perhaps twenty feet
scarcely waist-deep.  Then, as the Martian towered overhead scarcely
a couple of hundred yards away, I flung myself forward under the
surface.  The splashes of the people in the boats leaping into the
river sounded like thunderclaps in my ears.  People were landing
hastily on both sides of the river.

But the Martian machine took no more notice for the moment of
the people running this way and that than a man would of the
confusion of ants in a nest against which his foot has kicked.  When,
half suffocated, I raised my head above water, the Martian's hood
pointed at the batteries that were still firing across the river, and
as it advanced it swung loose what must have been the generator of
the Heat-Ray.

In another moment it was on the bank, and in a stride wading
halfway across.  The knees of its foremost legs bent at the farther
bank, and in another moment it had raised itself to its full height
again, close to the village of Shepperton.  Forthwith the six guns
which, unknown to anyone on the right bank, had been hidden behind
the outskirts of that village, fired simultaneously.  The sudden near
concussion, the last close upon the first, made my heart jump.  The
monster was already raising the case generating the Heat-Ray as the
first shell burst six yards above the hood.

I gave a cry of astonishment I saw and thought nothing of the
other four Martian monsters; my attention was riveted upon the nearer
incident.  Simultaneously two other shells burst in the air near the
body as the hood twisted round in time to receive, but not in time to
dodge, the fourth shell.

The shell burst clean in the face of the Thing.  The hood
bulged, flashed, was whirled off in a dozen tattered fragments of red
flesh and glittering metal.

"Hit!" shouted I, with something between a scream and a cheer.

I heard answering shouts from the people in the water about me.
I could have leaped out of the water with that momentary exultation.

The decapitated colossus reeled like a drunken giant; but it did
not fall over.  It recovered its balance by a miracle, and, no longer
heeding its steps and with the camera that fired the Heat-Ray now
rigidly upheld, it reeled swiftly upon Shepperton.  The living
intelligence, the Martian within the hood, was slain and splashed to
the four winds of heaven, and the Thing was now but a mere intricate
device of metal whirling to destruction.  It drove along in a
straight line, incapable of guidance.  It struck the tower of
Shepperton Church, smashing it down as the impact of a battering ram
might have done, swerved aside, blundered on, and collapsed with
tremendous force into the river out of my sight.

A violent explosion shook the air, and a spout of water, steam,
mud, and shattered metal shot far up into the sky.  As the camera of
the Heat-Ray hit the water, the latter had immediately flashed into
steam.  In another moment a huge wave, like a muddy tidal bore but
almost scaldingly hot, came sweeping round the bend upstream.  I saw
people struggling shorewards, and heard their screaming and shouting
faintly above the seething and roar of the Martian's collapse.

For a moment I heeded nothing of the heat, forgot the patent
need of self-preservation.  I splashed through the tumultuous water,
pushing aside a man in black to do so, until I could see round the
bend.  Half a dozen deserted boats pitched aimlessly upon the
confusion of the waves.  The fallen Martian came into sight
downstream, lying across the river, and for the most part submerged.

Thick clouds of steam were pouring off the wreckage, and through
the tumultuously whirling wisps I could see, intermittently and
vaguely, the gigantic limbs churning the water and flinging a splash
and spray of mud and froth into the air.  The tentacles swayed and
struck like living arms, and, save for the helpless purposelessness
of these movements, it was as if some wounded thing were struggling
for its life amid the waves.  Enormous quantities of a ruddy-brown
fluid were spurting up in noisy jets out of the machine.

My attention was diverted from this death flurry by a furious
yelling, like that of the thing called a siren in our manufacturing
towns.  A man, knee-deep near the towing path, shouted inaudibly to
me and pointed.  Looking back, I saw the other Martians advancing
with gigantic strides down the riverbank from the direction of
Chertsey.  The Shepperton guns spoke this time unavailingly.

At that I ducked at once under water, and, holding my breath
until movement was an agony, blundered painfully ahead under the
surface as long as I could.  The water was in a tumult about me, and
rapidly growing hotter.

When for a moment I raised my head to take breath and throw the
hair and water from my eyes, the steam was rising in a whirling white
fog that at first hid the Martians altogether.  The noise was
deafening.  Then I saw them dimly, colossal figures of grey,
magnified by the mist.  They had passed by me, and two were stooping
over the frothing, tumultuous ruins of their comrade.

The third and fourth stood beside him in the water, one perhaps
two hundreds yards from me, the other towards Laleham.  The
generators of the Heat-Rays waved high, and the hissing beams smote
down this way and that.

The air was full of sound, a deafening and confusing conflict of
noises--the clangorous din of the Martians, the crash of falling
houses, the thud of trees, fences, sheds flashing into flame, and the
crackling and roaring of fire.  Dense black smoke was leaping up to
mingle with the steam from the river, and as the Heat-Ray went to and
fro over Weybridge its impact was marked by flashes of incandescent
white, that gave place at once to a smoky dance of lurid flames.  The
nearer houses still stood intact, awaiting their fate, shadowy,
faint, and pallid in the steam, with the fire behind them going to
and fro.

For a moment perhaps I stood there, breast-high in the almost
boiling water, dumbfounded at my position, hopeless of escape.
Through the reek I could see the people who had been with me in the
river scrambling out of the water through the reeds, like little
frogs hurrying through grass from the advance of a man, or running to
and fro in utter dismay on the towing path.

Then suddenly the white flashes of the Heat-Ray came leaping
towards me.  The houses caved in as they dissolved at its touch, and
darted out flames; the trees changed to fire with a roar.  The Ray
flickered up and down the towing path, licking off the people who ran
this way and that, and came down to the water's edge not fifty yards
from where I stood.  It swept across the river to Shepperton, and the
water in its track rose in a boiling weal crested with steam.  I
turned shoreward.

In another moment the huge wave, well-nigh at the boiling-point,
had rushed upon me.  I screamed aloud, and scalded, half blinded,
agonised, I staggered through the leaping, hissing water towards the
shore.  Had my foot stumbled, it would have been the end.  I fell
helplessly, in full sight of the Martians, upon the broad, bare
gravelly spit that runs down to mark the angle of the Wey and Thames.
I expected nothing but death.

I have a dim memory of the foot of a Martian coming down within
a score of yards of my head, driving straight into the loose gravel,
whirling it this way and that, and lifting again; of a long suspense,
and then of the four carrying the debris of their comrade between
them, now clear and presently faint through a veil of smoke, receding
interminably, as it seemed to me, across a vast space of river and
meadow.  And then, very slowly; I realised that by a miracle I had
escaped.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 14: In London

My younger brother was in London when the Martians fell at
Woking.  He was a medical student, working for an imminent
examination, and he heard nothing of the arrival until Saturday
morning.  The morning papers on Saturday contained, in addition to
lengthy special articles on the planet Mars, on life in the planets,
and so forth, a brief and vaguely worded telegram, all the more
striking for its brevity.

The Martians, alarmed by the approach of a crowd had killed a
number of people with a quick-firing gun so the story ran.  The
telegram concluded with the words "Formidable as they seem to be, the
Martians have not moved from the pit into which they have fallen,
and, indeed, seem incapable of doing so.  Probably this is due to the
relative strength of the earth's gravitational energy."  On that last
text their leader-writer expanded very comfortingly.

Of course all the students in the crammer's biology class, to
which my brother went that day, were intensely interested, but there
were no signs of any unusual excitement in the streets.  The
afternoon papers puffed scraps of news under big headlines.  They had
nothing to tell beyond the movements of troops about the common, and
the burning of the pine woods between Woking and Weybridge, until
eight.  Then the St. James's Gazette in an extra-special edition,
announced the bare fact of the interruption of telegraphic
communication.  This was thought to be due to the falling of burning
pine trees across the line.  Nothing more of the fighting was known
that night, the night of my drive to Leatherhead and back.

My brother felt no anxiety about us, as he knew from the
description in the papers that the cylinder was a good two miles from
my house.  He made up his mind to run down that night to me, in
order, as he says, to see the Things before they were killed.  He
despatched a telegram, which never reached me, about four o'clock,
and spent the evening at a music hall.

In London, also, on Saturday night there was a thunderstorm, and
my brother reached Waterloo in a cab.  On the platform from which the
midnight train usually starts he learned, after some waiting, that an
accident prevented trains from reaching Woking that night.  The
nature of the accident he could not ascertain; indeed, the railway
authorities did not clearly know at that time.  There was very little
excitement in the station, as the officials, failing to realise that
anything further than a breakdown between Byfleet and Woking junction
had occurred, were running the theatre trains which usually passed
through Woking round by Virginia Water or Guildford.  They were busy
making the necessary arrangements to alter the route of the
Southampton and Portsmouth Sunday League excursions.  A nocturnal
newspaper reporter, mistaking my brother for the traffic manager, to
whom he bears a slight resemblance, waylaid and tried to interview
him.  Few people, excepting the railway officials, connected the
breakdown with the Martians.

I have read, in another account of these events, that on Sunday
morning "all London was electrified by the news from Woking."  As a
matter of fact, there was nothing to justify that every extravagant
phrase.  Plenty of Londoners did not hear of the Martians until the
panic of Monday morning.  Those who did took some time to realise all
that the hastily worded telegrams in the Sunday papers conveyed.  The
majority of people in London do not read Sunday papers.

The habit of personal security, moreover, is so deeply fixed in
the Londoner's mind, and startling intelligence so much a matter of
course in the papers, that they could read without any personal
tremors: "About seven o'clock last night the Martians came out of the
cylinder, and, moving about under an armour of metallic shields, have
completely wrecked Woking station with the adjacent houses, and
massacred an entire battalion of the Cardigan Regiment.  No details
are known.  Maxims have been absolutely useless against their armour;
the field guns have been disabled by them.  Flying hussars have been
galloping into Chertsey.  The Martians appear to be moving slowly
towards Chertsey or Windsor.  Great anxiety prevails in West Surrey,
and earthworks are being thrown up to check the advance Londonward."
That was how the Sunday Sun put it, and a clever and remarkably
prompt "handbook" article in the Referee compared the affair to a
menagerie suddenly let loose in a village.

No one in London knew positively of the nature of the armoured
Martians, and there was still a fixed idea that these monsters must
be sluggish: "crawling," "creeping painfully"--such expressions
occurred in almost all the earlier reports.  None of the telegrams
could have been written by an eye-witness of their advance.  The
Sunday papers printed separate editions as further news came to hand,
some even in default of it.  But there was practically nothing more
to tell people until late in the afternoon, when the authorities gave
the press agencies the news in their possession.  It was stated that
the people of Walton and Weybridge, and all the district, were
pouring along the roads Londonward, and that was all.

My brother went to church at the Foundling Hospital in the
morning, still in ignorance of what had happened on the previous
night.  There he heard allusions made to the invasion, and a special
prayer for peace.  Coming out, he bought a Referee.  He became
alarmed at the news in this, and went again to Waterloo station to
find out if communication were restored.  The omnibuses, carriages,
cyclists, and innumerable people walking in their best clothes seemed
scarcely affected by the strange intelligence that the news venders
were disseminating.  People were interested, or, if alarmed, alarmed
only on account of the local residents.  At the station he heard for
the first time that the Windsor and Chertsey lines were now
interrupted.  The porters told him that several remarkable telegrams
had been received in the morning from Byfleet and Chertsey stations,
but that these had abruptly ceased.  My brother could get very little
precise detail out of them.

"There's fighting going on about Weybridge," was the extent of
their information.

The train service was now very much disorganised.  Quite a
number of people who had been expecting friends from places on the
South-Western network were standing about the station.  One
grey-headed old gentleman came and abused the South-Western Company
bitterly to my brother.  "It wants showing up," he said.

One or two trains came in from Richmond, Putney, and Kingston,
containing people who had gone out for a day's boating and found the
locks closed and a feeling of panic in the air.  A man in a blue and
white blazer addressed my brother, full of strange tidings.

"There's hosts of people driving into Kingston in traps and
carts and things, with boxes of valuables and all that," he said.
"They come from Molesey and Weybridge and Walton, and they say
there's been guns heard at Chertsey, heavy firing, and that mounted
soldiers have told them to get off at once before the Martians are
coming.  We heard guns firing at Hampton Court station, but we
thought it was thunder.  What the dickens does it all mean?  The
Martians can't get out of their pit, can they?"

My brother could not tell him.

Afterwards he found that the vague feeling of alarm had spread
to the clients of the underground railway, and that the Sunday
excursionists began to return from all over the South-Western
"lung"--Barnes, Wimbledon, Richmond Park, Kew, and so forth--at
unnaturally early hours; but not a soul had anything more than vague
hearsay to tell of.  Everyone connected with the terminus seemed
ill-tempered.

About five o'clock the gathering crowd in the station was
immensely excited by the opening of the line of communication, which
is almost invariably closed, between the South-Eastern and the
South-Western stations, and the passage of carriage trucks bearing
huge guns and carriages crammed with soldiers.  These were the guns
that were brought up from Woolwich and Chatham to cover Kingston.
There was an exchange of pleasantries: "You'll get eaten!"  "We're
the beast-tamers!" and so forth.  A little while after that a squad
of police came into the station and began to clear the public off the
platforms, and my brother went out into the street again.

The church bells were ringing for evensong, and a squad of
Salvation Army lassies came singing down Waterloo Road.  On the
bridge a number of loafers were watching a curious brown scum that
came drifting down the stream in patches.  The sun was just setting,
and the Clock Tower and the Houses of Parliament rose against one of
the most peaceful skies it is possible to imagine, a sky of gold,
barred with long transverse stripes of reddish-purple cloud.  There
was talk of a floating body.  One of the men there, a reservist he
said he was, told my brother he had seen the heliograph flickering in
the west.

In Wellington Street my brother met a couple of sturdy roughs
who had just rushed out of Fleet Street with still wet newspapers and
staring placards.  "Dreadful catastrophe!"  They bawled one to the
other down Wellington Street.  "Fighting at Weybridge!  Full
description!  Repulse of the Martians!  London in Danger!"  He had to
give threepence for a copy of that paper.

Then it was, and then only, that he realised something of the
full power and terror of these monsters.  He learned that they were
not merely a handful of small sluggish creatures, but that they were
minds swaying vast mechanical bodies; and that they could move
swiftly and smite with such power that even the mightiest guns could
not stand against them.

They were described as "vast spider like machines, nearly a
hundred feet high, capable of the speed of an express train, and able
to shoot out a beam of intense heat."  Masked batteries, chiefly of
field guns, had been planted in the country about Horsell Common, and
especially between the Woking district and London.  Five of the
machines had been seen moving towards the Thames, and one, by a happy
chance, had been destroyed.  In the other cases the shells had
missed, and the batteries had been at once annihilated by the
Heat-Rays.  Heavy losses of soldiers were mentioned, but the tone of
the despatch was optimistic.

The Martians had been repulsed; they were not invulnerable.
They had retreated to their triangle of cylinders again, in the
circle about Woking.  Signallers with heliographs were pushing
forward upon them from all sides.  Guns were in rapid transit from
Windsor, Portsmouth, Aldershot, Woolwich--even from the north; among
others, long wire-guns of ninety-five tons from Woolwich.  Altogether
one hundred and sixteen were in position or being hastily placed,
chiefly covering London.  Never before in England had there been such
a vast or rapid concentration of military material.

Any further cylinders that fell, it was hoped, could be
destroyed at once by high explosives, which were being rapidly
manufactured and distributed.  No doubt, ran the report, the
situation was of the strangest and gravest description, but the
public was exhorted to avoid and discourage panic.  No doubt the
Martians were strange and terrible in the extreme, but at the outside
there could not be more than twenty of them against our millions.

The authorities had reason to suppose, from the size of the
cylinders, that at the outside there could not be more than five in
each cylinder--fifteen altogether.  And one at least was disposed
of--perhaps more.  The public would be fairly warned of the approach
of danger, and elaborate measures were being taken for the protection
of the people in the threatened southwestern suburbs.  And so, with
reiterated assurances of the safety of London and the ability of the
authorities to cope with the difficulty, this quasi-proclamation
closed.

This was printed in enormous type on paper so fresh that it was
still wet, and there had been no time to add a word of comment.  It
was curious, my brother said, to see how ruthlessly the usual
contents of the paper had been hacked and taken out to give this
place.

All down Wellington Street people could be seen fluttering out
the pink sheets and reading, and the Strand was suddenly noisy with
the voices of an army of hawkers following these pioneers.  Men came
scrambling off buses to secure copies.  Certainly this news excited
people intensely, whatever their previous apathy.  The shutters of a
map shop in the Strand were being taken down, my brother said, and a
man in his Sunday raiment, lemon-yellow gloves even, was visible
inside the window hastily fastening maps of Surrey to the glass.

Going on along the Strand to Trafalgar Square, the paper in his
hand, my brother saw some of the fugitives from West Surrey.  There
was a man with his wife and two boys and some articles of furniture
in a cart such as greengrocers use.  He was driving from the
direction of Westminster Bridge; and close behind him came a hay
waggon with five or six respectable-looking people in it, and some
boxes and bundles.  The faces of these people were haggard, and their
entire appearance contrasted conspicuously with the Sabbath-best
appearance of the people on the omnibuses.  People in fashionable
clothing peeped at them out of cabs.  They stopped at the Square as
if undecided which way to take, and finally turned eastward along the
Strand.  Some way behind these came a man in workday clothes, riding
one of those oldfashioned tricycles with a small front wheel.  He was
dirty and white in the face.

My brother turned down towards Victoria, and met a number of
such people.  He had a vague idea that he might see something of me.
He noticed an unusual number of police regulating the traffic.  Some
of the refugees were exchanging news with the people on the
omnibuses.  One was professing to have seen the Martians.  "Boilers
on stilts, I tell you, striding along like men."  Most of them were
excited and animated by their strange experience.

Beyond Victoria the public-houses were doing a lively trade with
these arrivals.  At all the street corners groups of people were
reading papers, talking excitedly, or staring at these unusual Sunday
visitors.  They seemed to increase as night drew on, until at last
the roads, my brother said, were like Epsom High Street on a Derby
Day.  My brother addressed several of these fugitives and got
unsatisfactory answers from most.

None of them could tell him any news of Woking except one man,
who assured him that Woking had been entirely destroyed on the
previous night.

"I come from Byfleet," he said; "man on a bicycle came through
the place in the early morning, and ran from door to door warning us
to come away.  Then came soldiers.  We went out to look, and there
were clouds of smoke to the south--nothing but smoke, and not a soul
coming that way.  Then we heard the guns at Chertsey, and folks
coming from Weybridge.  So I've locked up my house and come on."

At the time there was a strong feeling in the streets that the
authorities were to blame for their incapacity to dispose of the
invaders without all this inconvenience.

About eight o'clock a noise of heavy firing was distinctly
audible all over the south of London.  My brother could not hear it
for the traffic in the main thoroughfares, but by striking through
the quiet back streets to the river he was able to distinguish it
quite plainly.

He walked from Westminster to his apartments near Regent's Park,
about two.  He was now very anxious on my account, and disturbed at
the evident magnitude of the trouble.  His mind was inclined to run,
even as mine had run on Saturday, on military details.  He thought of
all those silent, expectant guns, of the suddenly nomadic
countryside; he tried to imagine "boilers on stilts" a hundred feet
high.

There were one or two cartloads of refugees passing along Oxford
Street, and several in the Marylebone Road, but so slowly was the
news spreading that Regent Street and Portland Place were full of
their usual Sunday-night promenaders, albeit they talked in groups,
and along the edge of Regent's Park there were as many silent couples
"walking out" together under the scattered gas lamps as ever there
had been.  The night was warm and still, and a little oppressive; the
sound of guns continued intermittently, and after midnight there
seemed to be sheet lightning in the south.

He read and re-read the paper, fearing the worst had happened to
me.  He was restless, and after supper prowled out again aimlessly.
He returned and tried in vain to divert his attention to his
examination notes.  He went to bed a little after midnight, and was
awakened from lurid dreams in the small hours of Monday by the sound
of door knockers, feet running in the street, distant drumming, and a
clamour of bells.  Red reflections danced on the ceiling.  For a
moment he lay astonished, wondering whether day had come or the world
gone mad.  Then he jumped out of bed and ran to the window.

His room was an attic and as he thrust his head out, up and down
the street there were a dozen echoes to the noise of his window sash,
and heads in every kind of night disarray appeared.  Enquiries were
being shouted.  "They are coming!" bawled a policeman, hammering at
the door; "the Martians are coming!" and hurried to the next door.

The sound of drumming and trumpeting came from the Albany Street
Barracks, and every church within earshot was hard at work killing
sleep with a vehement disorderly tocsin.  There was a noise of doors
opening, and window after window in the houses opposite flashed from
darkness into yellow illumination.

Up the street came galloping a closed carriage, bursting
abruptly into noise at the corner, rising to a clattering climax
under the window, and dying away slowly in the distance.  Close on
the rear of this came a couple of cabs, the forerunners of a long
procession of flying vehicles, going for the most part to Chalk Farm
station, where the North-Western special trains were loading up,
instead of coming down the gradient into Euston.

For a long time my brother stared out of the window in blank
astonishment, watching the policemen hammering at door after door,
and delivering their incomprehensible message.  Then the door behind
him opened, and the man who lodged across the landing came in,
dressed only in shirt, trousers, and slippers, his braces loose about
his waist, his hair, disordered from his pillow.

"What the devil is it?" be asked.  "A fire?  What a devil of a
row!"

They both craned their heads out of the window, straining to
hear what the policemen were shouting.  People were coming out of the
side streets, and standing in groups at the corners talking.

"What the devil is it all about?" said my brother's fellow
lodger.

My brother answered him vaguely and began to dress, running with
each garment to the window in order to miss nothing of the growing
excitement.  And presently men selling unnaturally early newspapers
came bawling into the street:

"London in danger of suffocation!  The Kingston and Richmond
defences forced!  Fearful massacres in the Thames Valley!"

And all about him--in the rooms below, in the houses on each
side and across the road, and behind in the Park Terraces and in the
hundred other streets of that part of Marylebone, and the Westbourne
Park district and St. Pancras, and westward and northward in Kilburn
and St. John's Wood and Hampstead, and eastward in Shoreditch and
Highbury and Haggerston and Hoxton, and, indeed, through all the
vastness of London from Ealing to East Ham--people were rubbing their
eyes, and opening windows to stare out and ask aimless questions,
dressing hastily as the first breath of the coming storm of Fear blew
through the streets.  It was the dawn of the great panic.  London,
which had gone to bed on Sunday night oblivious and inert, was
awakened, in the small hours of Monday morning, to a vivid sense of
danger.

Unable from his window to learn what was happening, my brother
went down and out into the street, just as the sky between the
parapets of the houses grew pink with the early dawn.  The flying
people on foot and in vehicles grew more numerous every moment.
"Black Smoke!" he heard people crying, and again "Black Smoke!"  The
contagion of such a unanimous fear was inevitable.  As my brother
hesitated on the door-step, he saw another news vender approaching,
and got a paper forthwith.  The man was running away with the rest,
and selling his papers for a shilling each as he ran--a grotesque
mingling of profit and panic.

And from this paper my brother read that catastrophic despatch
of the Commander-in-Chief:

"The Martians are able to discharge enormous clouds of a black
and poisonous vapour by means of rockets.  They have smothered our
batteries, destroyed Richmond, Kingston, and Wimbledon, and are
advancing slowly towards London, destroying everything on the way.
It is impossible to stop them.  There is no safety from the Black
Smoke but in instant flight."

That was all, but it was enough.  The whole population of the
great six-million city was stirring, slipping, running; presently it
would be pouring en masse northward.

"Black Smoke!" the voices cried.  "Fire!"

The bells of the neighbouring church made a jangling tumult, a
cart carelessly driven smashed, amid shrieks and curses, against the
water trough up the street.  Sickly yellow lights went to and fro in
the houses, and some of the passing cabs flaunted unextinguished
lamps.  And overhead the dawn was growing brighter, clear and steady
and calm.

He heard footsteps running to and fro in the rooms, and up and
down stairs behind him.  His landlady came to the door, loosely
wrapped in dressing gown and shawl; her husband followed ejaculating.

As my brother began to realise the import of all these things,
he turned hastily to his own room, put all his available money--some
ten pounds altogether--into his pockets, and went out again into the
streets.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 15: What Had Happened in Surrey

It was while the curate had sat and talked so wildly to me under
the hedge in the flat meadow's near Halliford, and while my brother
was catching the fugitives stream over Westminster Bridge, that the
Martians had resumed the offensive.  So far as one can ascertain from
the conflicting accounts that have been put forth, the majority of
them remained busied with preparations in the Horsell pit until nine
that night, hurrying on some operation that disengaged huge volumes
of green smoke.

But three certainly came out about eight o'clock and, advancing
slowly and cautiously, made their way through Byfleet and Pyrford
towards Ripley and Weybridge, and so came in sight of the expectant
batteries against the setting sun.  These Martians did not advance in
a body, but in a line, each perhaps a mile and a half from his
nearest fellow.  They communicated with one another by means of
sirenlike howls, running up and down the scale from one note to
another.

It was this howling and firing of the guns at Ripley and St.
George's Hill that we had heard at Upper Halliford.  The Ripley
gunners, unseasoned artillery volunteers who ought never to have been
placed in such a position, fired one wild, premature, ineffectual
volley, and bolted on horse and foot through the deserted village,
while the Martian, without using his Heat-Ray, walked serenely over
their guns, stepped gingerly among them, passed in front of them, and
so came unexpectedly upon the guns in Painshill Park, which he
destroyed.

The St. George's Hill men, however, were better led or of a
better mettle.  Hidden by a pine wood as they were, they seem to have
been quite unsuspected by the Martian nearest to them.  They laid
their guns as deliberately as if they had been on parade, and fired
at about a thousand yards' range.

The shells flashed all round him, and he was seen to advance a
few paces, stagger, and go down.  Everybody yelled together, and the
guns were reloaded in frantic haste.  The overthrown Martian set up a
prolonged ululation, and immediately a second glittering giant,
answering him appeared over the trees to the south.  It would seem
that a leg of the tripod had been smashed by one of the shells.  The
whole of the second volley flew wide of the Martian on the ground,
and, simultaneously, both his companions brought their Heat-Rays to
bear on the battery.  The ammunition blew up, the pine trees all
about the guns flashed into fire, and only one or two of the men who
were already running over the crest of the hill escaped.

After this it would seem that the three took counsel together
and halted, and the scouts who were watching them report that they
remained absolutely stationary for the next half hour.  The Martian
who bad been overthrown crawled tediously out of his hood, a small
brown figure, oddly suggestive from that distance of a speck of
blight, and apparently engaged in the repair of his support.  About
nine he had finished, for his cowl was then seen above the trees
again.

It was a few minutes past nine that night when these three
sentinels were joined by four other Martians, each carrying a thick
black tube.  A similar tube was handed to each of the three, and the
seven proceeded to distribute themselves at equal distances along a
curved line between St. George's Hill, Weybridge, and the village of
Send, southwest of Ripley.

A dozen rockets sprang out of the hills before them so soon as
they began to move, and warned the waiting batteries about Ditton and
Esher.  At the same time four of their fighting machines, similarly
armed with tubes, crossed the river, and two of them, black against
the western sky, came into sight of myself and the curate as we
hurried wearily and painfully along the road that runs northward out
of Halliford.  They moved, as it seemed to us, upon a cloud, for a
milky mist covered the fields and rose to a third of their height.

At this sight the curate cried faintly in his throat, and began
running; but I knew it was no good running from a Martian, and I
turned aside and crawled through dewy nettles and brambles into the
broad ditch by the side of the road.  He looked back, saw what I was
doing, and turned to join me.

The two halted, the nearer to us standing and facing Sunbury,
the remoter being a grey indistinctness towards the evening star,
away towards Staines.

The occasional howling of the Martians had ceased; they took up
their positions in the huge crescent about their cylinders in
absolute silence.  It was a crescent with twelve miles between its
horns.  Never since the devising of gunpowder was the beginning of a
battle so still.  To us and to an observer about Ripley it would have
had precisely the same effect--the Martians seemed in solitary
possession of the darkling night, lit only as it was by the slender
moon, the stars, the afterglow of the daylight, and the ruddy glare
from St. George's Hill and the woods of Painshill.

But facing that crescent everywhere--at Staines, Hounslow,
Ditton, Esher, Ockham, behind hills and woods south of the river, and
across the flat grass meadows to the north of it, wherever a cluster
of trees or village houses gave sufficient cover--the guns were
waiting.  The signal rockets burst and rained their sparks through
the night and vanished, and the spirit of all those watching
batteries rose to a tense expectation.  The Martians had but to
advance into the line of fire, and instantly those motionless black
forms of men, those guns glittering so darkly in the early night,
would explode into a thunderous fury of battle.

No doubt the thought that was uppermost in a thousand of those
vigilant minds, even as it was uppermost in mine, was the riddle--how
much they understood of us.  Did they grasp that we in our millions
were organised, disciplined, working together?  Or did they interpret
our spurts of fire, the sudden stinging of our shells, our steady
investment of their encampment, as we should the furious unanimity of
onslaught in a disturbed hive of bees?  Did they dream they might
exterminate us?  (At that time no one knew what food they needed.)  A
hundred such questions struggled together in my mind as I watched
that vast sentinel shape.  And in the back of my mind was the sense
of all the huge unknown and hidden forces Londonward.  Had they
prepared pitfalls?  Were the powder mills at Hounslow ready as a
snare?  Would the Londoners have the heart and courage to make a
greater Moscow of their mighty province of houses?

Then, after an interminable time, as it seemed to us, crouching
and peering through the hedge, came a sound like the distant
concussion of a gun.  Another nearer, and then another.  And then the
Martian beside us raised his tube on high and discharged it, gunwise,
with a heavy report that made the ground heave.  The one towards
Staines answered him.  There was no flash, no smoke, simply that
loaded detonation.

I was so excited by these heavy minute-guns following one
another that I so far forgot my personal safety and my scalded hands
as to clamber up into the hedge and stare towards Sunbury.  As I did
so a second report followed, and a big projectile hurtled overhead
towards Hounslow.  I expected at least to see smoke or fire, or some
such evidence of its work.  But all I saw was the deep blue sky
above, with one solitary star, and the white mist spreading wide and
low beneath.  And there had been no crash, no answering explosion.
The silence was restored; the minute lengthened to three.

"What has happened?" said the curate, standing up beside me.

"Heaven knows!" said I.

A bat flickered by and vanished.  A distant tumult of shouting
began and ceased.  I looked again at the Martian, and saw he was now
moving eastward along the riverbank, with a swift, rolling motion.

Every moment I expected the fire of some hidden battery to
spring upon him; but the evening calm was unbroken.  The figure of
the Martian grew smaller as he receded, and presently the mist and
the gathering night had swallowed him up.  By a common impulse we
clambered higher.  Towards Sunbury was a dark appearance, as though a
conical hill had suddenly come into being there, hiding our view of
the farther country; and then, remoter across the river, over Walton,
we saw another such summit.  These hill-like forms grew lower and
broader even as we stared.

Moved by a sudden thought, I looked northward, and there I
perceived a third of these cloudy black kopjes had risen.

Everything had suddenly became very still.  Far away to the
southeast, marking the quiet, we heard the Martians hooting to one
another, and then the air quivered again with the distant thud of
their guns.  But the earthly artillery made no reply.

Now at the time we could not understand these things, but later
I was to learn the meaning of these ominous kopjes that gathered in
the twilight.  Each of the Martians, standing in the great crescent I
have described, had discharged, by means of the gunlike tube he
carried, a huge canister over whatever hill, copse, cluster of
houses, or other possible cover for guns, chanced to be in front of
him.  Some fired only one of these, some two--as in the case of the
one we had seen; the one at Ripley is said to have discharged no
fewer than five at that time.  These canisters smashed on striking
the ground--they did not explode --and incontinently disengaged an
enormous volume of heavy, inky vapour, coiling and pouring upward in
a huge and ebony cumulus cloud, a gaseous hill that sank and spread
itself slowly over the surrounding country.  And the touch of that
vapour, the inhaling of its pungent wisps, was death to all that
breathes.

It was heavy, this vapour, heavier than the densest smoke, so
that, after the first tumultuous uprush and outflow of its impact, it
sank down through the air and poured over the ground in a manner
rather liquid than gaseous, abandoning the hills, and streaming into
the valleys and ditches and watercourses even as I have heard the
carbonic-acid gas that pours from volcanic clefts is wont to do.  And
where it came upon water some chemical action occurred, and the
surface would be instantly covered with a powdery scum that sank
slowly and made way for more.  The scum was absolutely insoluble, and
it is a strange thing, seeing the instant effect of the gas, that one
could drink without hurt the water from which it had been strained.
The vapour did not diffuse as a true gas would do.  It hung together
in banks, flowing sluggishly down the slope of the land and driving
reluctantly before the wind, and very slowly it combined with the
mist and moisture of the air, and sank to the earth in the form of
dust.  Save that an unknown element giving a group of four lines in
the blue of the spectrum is concerned, we are still entirely ignorant
of the nature of this substance.

Once the tumultuous upheaval of its dispersion was over, the
black smoke clung so closely to the ground, even before its
precipitation, that fifty feet up in the air, on the roofs and upper
stories of high houses and on great trees, there was a chance of
escaping its poison altogether, as was proved even that night at
Street Cobham and Ditton.

The man who escaped at the former place tells a wonderful story
of the strangeness of its coiling flow, and how he looked down from
the church spire and saw the houses of the village rising like ghosts
out of its inky nothingness.  For a day and a half he remained there,
weary, starving and sun-scorched, the earth under the blue sky and
against the prospect of the distant hills a velvet-black expanse,
with red roofs, green trees, and, later, black-veiled shrubs and
gates, barns, outhouses, and walls, rising here and there into the
sunlight.

But that was at Street Cobham, where the black vapour was
allowed to remain until it sank of its own accord into the ground As
a rule the Martians, when it had served its purpose, cleared the air
of it again by wading into it and directing a jet of steam upon it.

This they did with the vapour banks near us, as we saw in the
starlight from the window of a deserted house at Upper Halliford,
whither we had returned.  From there we could see the searchlights on
Richmond Hill and Kingston Hill going to and fro, and about eleven
the windows rattled, and we heard the sound of the huge siege guns
that had been put in position there.  These continued intermittently
for the space of a quarter of an hour, sending chance shots at the
invisible Martians at Hampton and Ditton, and then the pale beams of
the electric light vanished, and were replaced by a bright red glow.

Then the fourth cylinder fell--a brilliant green meteor--as I
learned afterwards, in Bushey Park.  Before the guns on the Richmond
and Kingston line of hills began, there was a fitful cannonade far
away in the southwest, due, I believe, to guns being fired haphazard
before the black vapour could overwhelm the gunners.

So, setting about it as methodically as men might smoke out a
wasps' nest, the Martians spread this strange stifling vapour over
the Londonward country.  The horns of the crescent slowly moved
apart, until at last they formed a line front Hanwell to Coombe and
Malden.  All night through their destructive tubes advanced.  Never
once, after the Martian at St. George's Hill was brought down, did
they give the artillery the ghost of a chance against them.  Wherever
there was a possibility of guns being laid for them unseen, a fresh
canister of the black vapour was discharged, and where the guns were
openly displayed the Heat-Ray was brought to bear.

By midnight the blazing trees along the slopes of Richmond Park
and the glare of Kingston Hill threw their light upon a network of
black smoke, blotting out the whole valley of the Thames and
extending as far as the eye could reach.  And through this two
Martians slowly waded, and turned their hissing steam jets this way
and that.

They were sparing of the Heat-Ray that night, either because
they had but a limited supply of material for its production or
because they did not wish to destroy the country but only to crush
and overawe the opposition they had aroused.  In the latter aim they
certainly succeeded.  Sunday night was the end of the organised
opposition to their movements.  After that no body of men would stand
against them, so hopeless was the enterprise.  Even the crews of the
torpedo-boats and destroyers that had brought their quick-firers up
the Thames refused to stop, mutinied, and went down again.  The only
offensive operation men ventured upon after that night was the
preparation of mines and pitfalls, and even in that their energies
were frantic and spasmodic.

One has to imagine, as well as one may, the fate of those
batteries towards Esher, waiting so tensely in the twilight.
Survivors there were none.  One may picture the orderly expectation,
the officers alert and watchful, the gunners ready, the ammunition
piled to hand, the limber gunners with their horses and waggons, the
groups of civilian spectators standing as near as they were
permitted, the evening stillness, the ambulances and hospital tents
with the burned and wounded from Weybridge; then the dull resonance
of the shots the Martians fired, and the clumsy projectile whirling
over the trees and houses and smashing amid the neighbouring fields.

One may picture, too, the sudden shifting of the attention, the
swiftly spreading coils and bellyings of that blackness advancing
headlong, towering heavenward, turning the twilight to a palpable
darkness, a strange and horrible antagonist of vapour striding upon
its victims, men and horses near it seen dimly, running, shrieking,
falling headlong, shouts of dismay, the guns suddenly abandoned, men
choking and writhing on the ground, and the swift broadening-out of
the opaque cone of smoke.  And then night and extinction--nothing but
a silent mass of impenetrable vapour hiding its dead.

Before dawn the black vapour was pouring through the streets of
Richmond, and the disintegrating organism of government was, with a
last expiring effort, rousing the population of London to the
necessity of flight.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 16: The Exodus from London

So you understand the roaring wave of fear that swept through
the greatest city in the world just as Monday was dawning--the stream
of flight rising swiftly to a torrent, lashing in a foaming tumult
round the railway stations, banked up into a horrible struggle about
the shipping in the Thames, and hurrying by every available channel
northward and eastward.  By ten o'clock the police organisation, and
by midday even the railway organisations, were losing coherency,
losing shape and efficiency, guttering, softening, running at last in
that swift liquefaction of the social body.

All the railway lines north of the Thames and the South-Eastern
people at Cannon Street had been warned by midnight on Sunday, and
trains were being filled.  People were fighting savagely for
standing-room in the carriages even at two o'clock.  By three, people
were being trampled and crushed even in Bishopsgate Street, a couple
of hundred yards or more from Liverpool Street station; revolvers
were fired, people stabbed, and the policemen who had been sent to
direct the traffic, exhausted and infuriated, were breaking the heads
of the people they were called out to protect.

And as the day advanced and the engine drivers and stokers
refused to return to London, the pressure of the flight drove the
people in an ever-thickening multitude away from the stations and
along the northward-running roads.  By midday a Martian had been seen
at Barnes, and a cloud of slowly sinking black vapour drove along the
Thames and across the flats of Lambeth, cutting off all escape over
the bridges in its sluggish advance.  Another bank drove over Ealing,
and surrounded a little island of survivors on Castle Hill, alive,
but unable to escape.

After a fruitless struggle to get aboard a North-Western train
at Chalk Farm--the engines of the trains that had loaded in the goods
yard there ploughed through shrieking people, and a dozen stalwart
men fought to keep the crowd from crushing the driver against his
furnace--my brother emerged upon the Chalk Farm road, dodged across
through a hurrying swarm of vehicles, and had the luck to be foremost
in the sack of a cycle shop.  The front tire of the machine he got
was punctured in dragging it through the window, but he got up and
off, notwithstanding, with no further injury than a cut wrist.  The
steep foot of Haverstock Hill was impassable owing to several
overturned horses, and my brother struck into Belsize Road.

So he got out of the fury of the panic, and, skirting the
Edgware Road, reached Edgware about seven, fasting and wearied, but
well ahead of the crowd.  Along the road people were standing in the
roadway, curious, wondering.  He was passed by a number of cyclists,
some horsemen, and two motor cars.  A mile from Edgware the rim of
the wheel broke, and the machine became unridable.  He left it by the
roadside and trudged through the village.  There were shops half
opened in the main street of the place, and people crowded on the
pavement and in the doorways and windows, staring astonished at this
extraordinary procession of fugitives that was beginning.  He
succeeded in getting some food at an inn.

For a time he remained in Edgware not knowing what next to do.
The flying people increased in number.  Many of them, like my
brother, seemed inclined to loiter in the place.  There was no fresh
news of the invaders from Mars.

At that time the road was crowded, but as yet far from
congested.  Most of the fugitives at that hour were mounted on
cycles, but there were soon motor cars, hansom cabs, and carriages
hurrying along, and the dust hung in heavy clouds along the road to
St. Albans.

It was perhaps a vague idea of making his way to Chelmsford,
where some friends of his lived, that at last induced my brother to
strike into a quiet lane running eastward.  Presently he came upon a
stile, and, crossing it, followed a footpath northeastward.  He
passed near several farmhouses and come little places whose names he
did not learn.  He saw few fugitives until, in a grass lane towards
High Barnet, he happened upon two ladies who became his fellow
travellers.  He came upon them just in time to save them.

He heard their screams, and, hurrying round the corner, saw a
couple of men struggling to drag them out of the little pony-chaise
in which they had been driving, while a third with difficulty held
the frightened pony's head.  One of the ladies, a short woman dressed
in white, was simply screaming; the other, a dark, slender figure,
slashed at the man who gripped her arm with a whip she held in her
disengaged hand.

My brother immediately grasped the situation, shouted, and
hurried towards the struggle.  One of the men desisted and turned
towards him, and my brother, realising from his antagonist's face
that a fight was unavoidable, and being an expert boxer, went into
him forthwith and sent him down against the wheel of the chaise.

It was no time for pugilistic chivalry and my brother laid him
quiet with a kick, and gripped the collar of the man who pulled at
the slender lady's arm.  He heard the clatter of hoofs, the whip
stung across his face, a third antagonist struck him between the
eyes, and the man he held wrenched himself free and made off down the
lane in the direction from which he had come.

Partly stunned, he found himself facing the man who had held the
horse's head, and became aware of the chaise receding from him down
the lane, swaying from side to side, and with the women in it looking
back.  The man before him, a burly rough, tried to close, and he
stopped him with a blow in the face.  Then, realising that he was
deserted, he dodged round and made off down the lane after the
chaise, with the sturdy man close behind him, and the fugitive, who
had turned now, following remotely.

Suddenly he stumbled and fell; his immediate pursuer went
headlong, and he rose to his feet to find himself with a couple of
antagonists again.  He would have had little chance against them had
not the slender lady very pluckily pulled up and returned to his
help.  It seems she had had a revolver all this time, but it had been
under the seat when she and her companion were attacked.  She fired
at six yards' distance, narrowly missing my brother.  The less
courageous of the robbers made off, and his companion followed him,
cursing his cowardice.  They both stopped in sight down the lane,
where the third man lay insensible.

"Take this!" said the slender lady, and she gave my brother her
revolver.

"Go back to the chaise," said my brother, wiping the blood from
his split lip.

She turned without a word--they were both panting--and they went
back to where the lady in white struggled to hold back the frightened
pony.

The robbers had evidently had enough of it.  When my brother
looked again they were retreating.

"I'll sit here," said my brother, "if I may"; and he got upon
the empty front seat.  The lady looked over her shoulder.

"Give me the reins," she said, and laid the whip along the
pony's side.  In another moment a bend in the road hid the three men
from my brother's eyes.

So, quite unexpectedly, my brother found himself, panting, with
a cut mouth, a bruised jaw, and blood-stained knuckles, driving along
an unknown lane with these two women.

He learned they were the wife and the younger sister of a
surgeon living at Stanmore, who had come in the small hours from a
dangerous case at Pinner, and heard at some railway station on his
way of the Martian advance.  He had hurried home, roused the
women--their servant had left them two days before--packed some
provisions, put his revolver under the seat--luckily for my
brother--and told them to drive on to Edgware, with the idea of
getting a train there.  He stopped behind to tell the neighbours.  He
would overtake them, he said, at about half past four in the morning,
and now it was nearly nine and they had seen nothing of him.  They
could not stop in Edgware because of the growing traffic through the
place, and so they had come into this side lane.

That was the story they told my brother in fragments when
presently they stopped again, nearer to New Barnet.  He promised to
stay with them, at least until they could determine what to do, or
until the missing man arrived, and professed to be an expert shot
with the revolver--a weapon strange to him--in order to give them
confidence.

They made a sort of encampment by the wayside, and the pony
became happy in the hedge.  He told them of his own escape out of
London, and all that he knew of these Martians and their ways.  The
sun crept higher in the sky, and after a time their talk died out and
gave place to an uneasy state of anticipation.  Several wayfarers
came along the lane, and of these my brother gathered such news as he
could.  Every broken answer he had deepened his impression of the
great disaster that had come on humanity, deepened his persuasion of
the immediate necessity for prosecuting this flight.  He urged the
matter upon them.

"We have money," said the slender woman, and hesitated.

Her eyes met my brother's, and her hesitation ended.

"So have I," said my brother.

She explained that they had as much as thirty pounds in gold,
besides a five-pound note, and suggested that with that they might
get upon a train at St. Albans or New Barnet.  My brother thought
that was hopeless, seeing the fury of the Londoners to crowd upon the
trains, and broached his own idea of striking across Essex towards
Harwich and thence escaping from the country altogether.

Mrs. Elphinstone--that was the name of the woman in white--would
listen to no reasoning, and kept calling upon "George"; but her
sister-in-law was astonishingly quiet and deliberate, and at last
agreed to my brother's suggestion.  So, designing to cross the Great
North Road, they went on towards Barnet, my brother leading the pony
to save it as much as possible.

As the sun crept up the sky the day became excessively hot, and
under foot a thick, whitish sand grew burning and blinding, so that
they travelled only very slowly.  The hedges were grey with dust.
And as they advanced towards Barnet a tumultuous murmuring grew
stronger.

They began to meet more people.  For the most part these were
staring before them, murmuring indistinct questions, jaded, haggard,
unclean.  One man in evening dress passed them on foot, his eyes on
the ground.  They heard his voice, and, looking back at him, saw one
hand clutched in his hair and the other beating invisible things.
His paroxysm of rage over, be went on his way without once looking
back.

As my brother's party went on towards the crossroads to the
south of Barnet they saw a woman approaching the road across some
fields on their left, carrying a child and with two other children;
and then passed a man in dirty black, with a thick stick in one hand
and a small portmanteau in the other.  Then round the corner of the
lane, from between the villas that guarded it at its confluence with
the highroad, came a little, cart drawn by a sweating black pony and
driven by a sallow youth in a bowler hat, grey with dust.  There were
three girls, East End factory girls, and a couple of little children
crowded in the cart.

"This'll tike us rahnd Edgware?" asked the driver, wild-eyed,
white-faced; and when my brother told him it would if he turned to
the left, he whipped up at once without the formality of thanks.

My brother noticed a pale grey smoke or haze rising among the
houses in front of them, and veiling the white facade of a terrace
beyond the road that appeared between the backs of the villas.  Mrs.
Elphinstone suddenly cried out at a number of tongues of smoky red
flame leaping up above the houses in front of them against the hot,
blue sky.  The tumultuous noise resolved itself now into the
disorderly mangling of many voices, the gride of many wheels, the
creaking of waggons, and the staccato of hoofs.  The lane came round
sharply not fifty yards from the crossroads.

"Good heavens!" cried Mrs. Elphinstone.  "What is this you are
driving us into?"

My brother stopped.

For the main road was a boiling stream of people, a torrent of
human beings rushing northward, one pressing on another.  A great
bank of dust, white and luminous in the blaze of the sun, made
everything within twenty feet of the ground grey and indistinct and
was perpetually renewed by the hurrying feet of a dense crowd of
horses and of men and women on foot, and by the wheels of vehicles of
every description.

"Way!" my brother heard voices crying. "Make way!"

It was like riding into the smoke of a fire to approach the
meeting point of the lane and road; the crowd roared like a fire, and
the dust was hot and pungent.  And, indeed, a little way up the road
a villa was burning and sending rolling masses of black smoke across
the road to add to the confusion.

Two men came past them.  Then a dirty woman, carrying a heavy
bundle and weeping.  A lost retriever dog, with hanging tongue,
circled dubiously round them, scared and wretched, and fled at my
brother's threat.

So much as they could see of the road Londonward between the
houses to the right was a tumultuous stream of dirty, hurrying
people, pent in between the villas on either side; the black heads,
the crowded forms, grew into distinctness as they rushed towards the
corner, hurried past, and merged their individuality again in a
receding multitude that was swallowed up at last in a cloud of dust.

"Go on!  Go on!" cried the voices. "Way!  Way!"

One man's hands pressed on the back of another.  My brother
stood at the pony's head.  Irresistibly attracted, he advanced
slowly, pace by pace, down the lane.

Edgware had been a scene of confusion, Chalk Farm a riotous
tumult, but this was a whole population in movement.  It is hard to
imagine that host.  It had no character of its own.  The figures
poured out past the corner, and receded with their backs to the group
in the lane.  Along the margin came those who were on foot threatened
by the wheels, stumbling in the ditches, blundering into one another.

The carts and carriages crowded close upon one another, making
little way for those swifter and more impatient vehicles that darted
forward every now and then when an opportunity showed itself of doing
so, sending the people scattering against the fences and gates of the
villas.

"Push on!" was the cry. "Push on!  They are coming!"

In one cart stood a blind man in the uniform of the Salvation
Army, gesticulating with his crooked fingers and bawling, "Eternity!
Eternity!" His voice was hoarse and very loud so that my brother
could hear him long after he was lost to sight in the dust.  Some of
the people who crowded in the carts whipped stupidly at their horse;
and quarrelled with other drivers; some sat motionless, staring at
nothing with miserable eyes; some gnawed their hands with thirst, or
lay prostrate in the bottoms of their conveyances.  The horses' bits
were covered with foam, their eyes bloodshot.

There were cabs, carriages, shop cars, waggons, beyond counting;
a mail cart, a road-cleaner's cart marked "Vestry of St.  Pancras," a
huge timber waggon crowded with roughs.  A brewer's dray rumbled by
with its two near wheels splashed with fresh blood.

"Clear the way!" cried the voice "Clear the way!"

"Eter-nity!  Eter-nity!" came echoing down the road.

There were sad, haggard women tramping by, well dressed, with
children that cried and stumbled, their dainty clothes smothered in
dust, their weary faces smeared with tears.  With many of these came
men, sometimes helpful, sometimes lowering and savage.  Fighting side
by side with them pushed some weary street outcast in faded black
rags, wide-eyed, loud-voiced, and foul-mouthed.  There were sturdy
workmen thrusting their way along, wretched, unkempt men, clothed
like clerks or shopmen, struggling spasmodically; a wounded soldier
my brother noticed, men dressed in the clothes of railway potters,
one wretched creature in a nightshirt with a coat thrown over it.

But varied as its composition was, certain things all that host
had in common.  There were fear and pain on their faces, and fear
behind them.  A tumult up the road, a quarrel for a place in a
waggon, sent the whole host of them quickening their pace; even a man
so scared and broken that his knees bent under him was galvanised for
a moment into renewed activity.  The heat and dust had already been
at work upon this multitude.  Their skins were dry, their lips black
and cracked.  They were all thirsty, weary, and footsore.  And amid
the various cries one heard disputes, reproaches, groans of weariness
and fatigue; the voices of most of them were hoarse and weak.
Through it all ran a refrain:

"Way!  Way!  The Martians are coming!"

Few stopped and came aside from that flood.  The lane opened
slantingly into the main road with a narrow opening, and had a
delusive appearance of coming from the direction of London.  Yet a
kind of eddy of people drove into its mouth; weaklings elbowed out of
the stream, who for the most part rested but a moment before plunging
into it again.  A little way down the lane, with two friends bending
over him, lay a man with a bare leg, wrapped about with bloody rags.
He was a lucky man to have friends.

A little old man, with a grey military moustache and a filthy
black frock coat, limped out and sat down beside the trap, removed
his boot--his sock was blood-stained--shook out a pebble, and hobbled
on again; and then a little girl of eight or nine, all alone, threw
herself under the hedge close by my brother, weeping.

"I can't go on!  I can't go on!"

My brother woke front his torpor of astonishment and lifted her
up, speaking gently to her, and carried her to Miss Elphinstone.  So
soon as my brother touched her she became quite still, as if
frightened.

"Ellen!" shrieked a woman in the crowd, with tears in her
voice--"Ellen!"  And the child suddenly darted away from my brother,
crying "Mother!"

"They are coming," said a man on horseback, riding past along
the lane.

Out of the way, there!" bawled a coachman, towering high; and my
brother saw a closed carriage turning into the lane.

The people crushed back on one another to avoid the horse.  My
brother pushed the pony and chaise hack into the hedge, and the man
drove by and stopped at the turn of the way.  It was a carriage, with
a pole for a pair of horses, but only one was in the traces.  My
brother saw dimly through the dust that two men lifted out something
on a white stretcher and put it gently on the grass beneath the
privet hedge.

One of the men came running to my brother.

"Where is there any water?" he said.  "He is dying fast, and
very thirsty.  It is Lord Garrick."

"Lord Garrick!" said my brother; "the Chief Justice?"

"The water?" he said.

"There may be a tap," said my brother, "in some of the houses.
We have no water.  I dare not leave my people."

The man pushed against the crowd towards the gate of the corner
house.

"Go on!" said the people, thrusting at him.  "They are coming!
Go on."

Then my brother's attention was distracted by a bearded,
eagle-faced man lugging a small handbag, which split even as my
brother's eyes rested on it and disgorged a mass of sovereigns that
seemed to break up into separate coins as it struck the ground.  They
rolled hither and thither among the struggling feet of men and
horses.  The man stopped and looked stupidly at the heap, and the
shaft of a cab struck his shoulder and sent him reeling.  He gave a
shriek and dodged back, and a wheel shaved him narrowly.

"Way!" cried the men all about him.  "Make way!"

So soon as the cab had passed, he flung himself, with both hands
open, upon the heap of coins, and began thrusting handfuls in his
pocket.  A horse rose close upon him, and in another moment, half
rising, he had been borne down under the horse's hoofs.

"Stop!" screamed my brother, and pushing a woman out of his way,
tried to clutch the bit of the horse.

Before he could get to it, he heard a scream under the wheels,
and saw through the dust the rim passing over the poor wretch's back.
The driver of the cart slashed his whip at my brother, who ran round
behind the cart.  The multitudinous shouting confused his ears.  The
man was writhing in the dust among his scattered money, unable to
rise, for the wheel had broken his back, and his lower limbs lay limp
and dead.  My brother stood up and yelled at the next driver, and a
man on a black horse came to his assistance.

"Get him out of the road," said he; and, clutching the man's
collar with his free hand, my brother lugged him sideways.  But he
still clutched after his money, and regarded my brother fiercely,
hammering at his arm with a handful of gold.  "Go on!  Go on!"
shouted angry voices behind.  "Way!  Way!"

There was a smash as the pole of a carriage crashed into the
cart that the man on horseback stopped.  My brother looked up, and
the man with the gold twisted his head round and bit the wrist that
held his collar.  There was a concussion, and the black horse came
staggering sideways, and the carthorse pushed beside it.  A hoof
missed my brother's foot by a hair's breadth.  He released his grip
on the fallen man and jumped back.  He saw anger change to terror on
the face of the poor wretch on the ground, and in a moment he was
hidden and my brother was borne backward and carried past the
entrance of the lane, and had to fight hard in the torrent to recover
it.

He saw Miss Elphinstone covering her eyes, and a little child,
with all a child's want of sympathetic imagination, staring with
dilated eyes at a dusty something that lay black and still, ground
and crushed under the rolling wheels.  "Let us go back!" he shouted,
and began turning the pony round.  "We cannot cross this--hell," he
said and they went back a hundred yards the way they had come, until
the fighting crowd was hidden.  As they passed the bend in the lane
my brother saw the face of the dying man in the ditch under the
privet, deadly white and drawn, and shining with perspiration.  The
two women sat silent, crouching in their seat and shivering.

Then beyond the bend my brother stopped again.  Miss Elphinstone
was white and pale, and her sister-in-law sat weeping, too wretched
even to call upon "George."  My brother was horrified and perplexed.
So soon as they had retreated he realized how urgent and unavoidable
it was to attempt this crossing.  He turned to Miss Elphinstone,
suddenly resolute.

"We must go that way," he said, and led the pony round again.

For the second time that day this girl proved her quality.  To
force their way into the torrent of people, my brother plunged into
the traffic and held back a cab horse, while she drove the pony
across its head.  A waggon locked wheels for a moment and ripped a
long splinter from the chaise.  In another moment they were caught
and swept forward by the stream.  My brother, with the cabman's whip
marks red across his face and hands, scrambled into the chaise and
took the reins from her.

"Point the revolver at the man behind," he said, giving it to
her, "if he presses us too hard.  No!--point it at his horse."

Then he began to look out for a chance of edging to the right
across the road.  But once in the stream he seemed to lose volition,
to become a part of that dusty rout.  They swept through Chipping
Barnet with the torrent; the were nearly a mile beyond the centre of
the town before they had fought across to the opposite side of the
way.  It was din and confusion indescribable; but in and beyond the
town the road forks repeatedly, and this to some extent relieved the
stress.

They struck eastward through Hadley, and there on either side of
the road, and at another place farther on they came upon a great
multitude of people drinking at the stream, some fighting to come at
the water.  And farther on, from a hill near East Barnet, they saw
two trains running slowly one after the other without signal or
order--trains swarming with people, with men even among the coals
behind the engine--going northward along the Great Northern Railway.
My brother supposes they must have filled outside London, for at that
time the furious terror of the people had rendered the central
termini impossible.

Near this place they halted for the rest of the afternoon, for
the violence of the day had already utterly exhausted all three of
them.  They began to suffer the beginnings of hunger; the night was
cold, and none of them dared to sleep.  And in the evening many
people came hurrying along the road near by their stopping place,
fleeing from unknown dangers before them, and going in the direction
from which my brother had come.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 1

Chapter 17: The "Thunder Child"

Had the Martians aimed only at destruction, they might on Monday
have annihilated the entire population of London, as it spread itself
slowly through the home counties.  Not only along the road through
Barnet, but also through Edgware and Waltham Abbey, and along the
roads eastward to Southend and Shoeburyness, and south of the Thames
to Deal and Broadstairs, poured the same frantic rout.  If one could
have hung that June morning in a balloon in the blazing blue above
London every northward and eastward road running out of the tangled
maze of streets would have seemed stippled black with the streaming
fugitives, each dot a human agony of terror and physical distress.  I
have set forth at length in the last chapter my brother's account of
the road through Chipping Barnet, in order that my readers may
realise how that swarming of black dots appeared to one of those
concerned.  Never before in the history of the world had such a mass
of human beings moved and suffered together.  The legendary hosts of
Goths and Huns, the hugest armies Asia has ever seen, would have been
but a drop in that current.  And this was no disciplined march; it
was a stampede--a stampede gigantic and terrible--without order and
without a goal, six million people unarmed and unprovisioned, driving
headlong.  It was the beginning of the rout of civilisation, of the
massacre of mankind.

Directly below him the balloonist would have seen the network of
streets far and wide, houses, churches, squares, crescents,
gardens--already derelict--spread out like a huge map, and in the
southward blotted.  Over Ealing, Richmond, Wimbledon, it would have
seemed as if some monstrous pen had flung ink upon the chart.
Steadily, incessantly, each black splash grew and spread, shooting
out ramifications this way and that, now banking itself against
rising ground, now pouring swiftly over a crest into a new-found
valley, exactly as a gout of ink would spread itself upon blotting
paper.

And beyond, over the blue hills that rise southward of the
river, the glittering Martians went to and fro, calmly and
methodically spreading their poison cloud over this patch of country
and then over that, laying it again with their steam jets when it had
served its purpose, and taking possession of the conquered country.
They do not seem to have aimed at extermination so much as at
complete demoralisation and the destruction of any opposition.  They
exploded any stores of powder they came upon, cut every telegraph,
and wrecked the railways here and there.  They were hamstringing
mankind.  They seemed in no hurry to extend the field of their
operations, and did not come beyond the central part of London all
that day.  It is possible that a very considerable number of people
in London stuck to their houses through Monday morning.  Certain it
is that many died at home suffocated by the Black Smoke.

Until about midday the Pool of London was an astonishing scene.
Steamboats and shipping of all sorts lay there, tempted by the
enormous sums of money offered by fugitives, and it is said that many
who swam out to these vessels were thrust off with boathooks and
drowned.  About one o'clock in the afternoon the thinning remnant of
a cloud of the black vapour appeared between the arches of
Blackfriars Bridge.  At that the Pool became a scene of mad
confusion, fighting, and collision, and for some time a multitude of
boats and barges jammed in the northern arch of the Tower Bridge, and
the sailors and lightermen had to fight savagely against the people
who swarmed upon them from the riverfront.  People were actually
clambering down the piers of the bridge from above.

When, an hour later, a Martian appeared beyond the Clock Tower
and waded down the river, nothing but wreckage floated above
Limehouse.

Of the falling of the fifth cylinder I have presently to tell.
The sixth star fell at Wimbledon.  My brother, keeping watch beside
the women in the chaise in a meadow, saw the green flash of it far
beyond the hills.  On Tuesday the little party, still set upon
getting across the sea, made its way through the swarming country
towards Colchester.  The news that the Martians were now in
possession of the whole of London was confirmed.  They had been seen
at Highgate, and even, it was said, at Neasden.  But they did not
come into my brother's view until the morrow.

That day the scattered multitudes began to realise the urgent
need of provisions.  As they grew hungry the rights of property
ceased to be regarded.  Farmers went out to defend their
cattle-sheds, granaries, and ripening root crops with arms in their
hands.  A number of people now, like my brother, had their faces
eastward, an there were some desperate souls even going back towards
London to get food.  These were chiefly people from the northern
suburbs whose knowledge of the Black Smoke came by hearsay.  He heard
that about half the members of the government had gathered at
Birmingham, and that enormous quantities of high explosives were
being prepared to be used in automatic mines across the Midland
counties.

He was also told that the Midland Railway Company had replaced
the desertions of the first day's panic, had resumed traffic, and was
running northward trains from St. Albans to relieve the congestion of
the home counties.  There was also a placard in Chipping Ongar
announcing that large stores of flour were available in the northern
towns and that within twenty-four hours bread would be distributed
among the starving people in the neighbourhood.  But this
intelligence did not deter him from the plan of escape he had formed,
and the three pressed eastward all day, and heard no more of the
bread distribution than this promise.  Nor, as a matter of fact, did
anyone else hear more of it.  That night fell the seventh star,
falling upon Primrose Hill.  It fell while Miss Elphinstone was
watching, for she took that duty, alternately with my brother.  She
saw it.

On Wednesday the three fugitives--they had passed the night in a
field of unripe wheat--reached Chelmsford, and there a body of the
inhabitants, calling itself the Committee of Public Supply, seized
the pony as provisions, and would give nothing in exchange for it but
the promise of a share in it the next day.  Here there were rumours
of Martians at Epping, and news of the destruction of Waltham Abbey
Powder Mills in a vain attempt to blow up one of the invaders.

People were watching for Martians here from the church towers.
My brother, very luckily for him as it chanced, preferred to push on
at once to the coast rather than wait for food, although all three of
them were very hungry.  By midday they passed through Tillingham,
which, strangely enough, seemed to be quite silent and deserted, save
for a few furtive plunderers hunting for food.  Near Tillingham they
suddenly came in sight of the sea, and the most amazing crowd of
shipping of all sorts that it is possible to imagine.

For after the sailors could no longer come up the Thames, they
came on to the Essex coast, to Harwich and Walton and Clacton, and
afterwards to Foulness and Shoebury, to bring off the people.  They
lay in a huge sickle-shaped curve that vanished into mist at last
towards the Naze.  Close inshore was a multitude of fishing
smacks-English, Scotch, French, Dutch, and Swedish; steam launches
from the Thames, yachts, electric boats; and beyond were ships of
large burden, a multitude of filthy colliers, trim merchantmen,
cattle ships, passenger boats, petroleum tanks, ocean tramps, an old
white transport even, neat white and grey liners from Southampton and
Hamburg; and along the blue coast across the Blackwater my brother
could make out dimly a dense swarm of boats chaffering with the
people on the beach, a swarm which also extended up the Blackwater
almost to Maldon.

About a couple of miles out lay an ironclad, very low in the
water, almost, to my brother's perception, like a water-logged ship.
This was the ram Thunder Child.  It was the only warship in sight,
but far away to the right over the smooth surface of the sea--for
that day there was a dead calm--lay a serpent of black smoke to mark
the next ironclads of the Channel Fleet, which hovered in an extended
line, steam up and ready for action, across the Thames estuary during
the course of the Martian conquest, vigilant and yet powerless to
prevent it.

At the sight of the sea, Mrs. Elphinstone, in spite of the
assurances of her sister-in-law, gave way to panic.  She had never
been out of England before, she would rather die than trust herself
friendless in a foreign country, and so forth.  She seemed, poor
woman, to imagine that the French and the Martians might prove very
similar.  She had been growing increasingly hysterical, fearful, and
depressed during the two days' journeyings.  Her great idea was to
return to Stanmore.  Things had been always well and safe at
Stanmore.  They would find George at Stanmore.

It was with the greatest difficulty they could get her down to
the beach where presently my brother succeeded in attracting the
attention of some men on a paddle steamer from the Thames.  They sent
a boat and drove a bargain for thirty-six pounds for the three.  The
steamer was going, these men said, to Ostend.

It was about two o'clock when my brother, having paid their
frees at the gangway, found himself safely aboard the steamboat with
his charges.  There was food aboard, albeit at exorbitant prices, and
the three of them contrived to eat a meal on one of the seats
forward.

There were already a couple of score of passengers aboard, some
of whom had expended their last money in securing a passage, but the
captain lay off the Blackwater until five in the afternoon, picking
up passengers until the seated decks were even dangerously crowded.
He would probably have remained longer had it not been for the sound
of guns that began about that hour in the south.  As if in answer,
the ironclad seaward fired a small gun and hoisted a string of flags.
A jet of smoke sprang out of her funnels.

Some of the passengers were of opinion that this firing came
from Shoeburyness, until it was noticed that it was growing louder.
At the same time, far away in the southeast the masts and upperworks
of three ironclads rose one after the other out of the sea, beneath
clouds of black smoke.  But my brother's attention speedily reverted
to the distant firing in the south.  He fancied he saw a column of
smoke rising out of the distant grey haze.

The little steamer was already flapping her way eastward of the
big crescent of shipping, and the low Essex coast was growing blue
and hazy, when a Martian appeared, small and faint in the remote
distance, advancing along the muddy coast from the direction of
Foulness.  At that the captain on the bridge swore at the top of his
voice with fear and anger at his own delay, and the paddles seemed
infected with his terror.  Every soul aboard stood at the bulwarks or
on the seats of the steamer and stared at that distant shape, higher
than the trees or church towers inland, and advancing with a
leisurely parody of a human stride.

It was the first Martian my brother had seen, and he stood, more
amazed than terrified, watching this Titan advancing deliberately
towards the shipping, wading farther and farther into the water as
the coast fell away.  Then, far away beyond the Crouch, came another,
striding over some stunted trees, and then yet another, still farther
off, wading deeply through a shiny mudflat that seemed to hang
halfway up between sea and sky.  They were all stalking seaward, as
if to intercept the escape of the multitudinous vessels that were
crowded between Foulness and the Naze.  In spite of the throbbing
exertions of the engines of the little paddleboat, and the pouring
foam that her wheels flung behind her, she receded with terrifying
slowness from this ominous advance.

Glancing northwestward, my brother saw the large crescent of
shipping already writhing with the approaching terror; one ship
passing behind another, another coming round from broadside to end
on, steamships whistling and giving off volumes of steam, sails being
let out, launches rushing hither and thither.  He was so fascinated
by this and by the creeping danger away to the left that he had no
eyes for anything seaward.  And then a swift movement of the
steamboat (she had suddenly come round to avoid being run down) flung
him headlong from the seat upon which he was standing.  There was a
shouting all about him, a trampling of feet, and a cheer that seemed
to be answered faintly.  The steamboat lurched and rolled him over
upon his hands.

He sprang to his feet and saw to starboard, and not a hundred
yards from their heeling, pitching boat, a vast iron bulk like the
blade of a plough tearing through the water, tossing it on either
side in huge waves of foam that leaped towards the steamer, flinging
her paddles helplessly in the air, and then sucking her deck down
almost to the waterline.

A douche of spray blinded my brother for a moment.  When his
eyes were clear again he saw the monster had passed and was rushing
landward.  Big iron upperworks rose out of this headlong structure,
and from that twin funnels projected and spat a smoking blast shot
with fire.  It was the torpedo ram, Thunder Child, steaming headlong,
coming to the rescue of the threatened shipping.

Keeping his footing on the heaving deck by clutching the
bulwarks, my brother looked past this charging leviathan at the
Martians again, and he saw the three of them now close together, and
standing so far out to sea that their tripod supports were almost
entirely submerged.  Thus sunken, and seen in remote perspective,
they appeared far less formidable than the huge iron bulk in whose
wake the steamer was pitching so helplessly.  It would seem they were
regarding this new antagonist with astonishment.  To their
intelligence, it may be, the giant was even such another as
themselves.  The Thunder Child fired no gun, but simply drove full
speed towards them.  It was probably her not firing that enabled her
to get so near the enemy as she did.  They did not know what to make
of her.  One shell, and they would have sent her to the bottom
forthwith with the Heat-Ray.

She was steaming at such a pace that in a minute she seemed
halfway between the steamboat and the Martians--a diminishing black
bulk against the receding horizontal expanse of the Essex coast.

Suddenly the foremost Martian lowered his tube and discharged a
canister of the black gas at the ironclad.  It hit her larboard side
and glanced off in an inky jet that rolled away to seaward, an
unfolding torrent of Black Smoke, from which the ironclad drove
clear.  To the watchers from the steamer, low in the water and with
the sun in their eyes, it seemed as though she were already among the
Martians.

They saw the gaunt figures separating and rising out of the
water as they retreated shoreward, and one of them raised the
camera-like generator of the Heat-Ray.  He held it pointing obliquely
downward, and a bank of steam sprang from the water at its touch.  It
must have driven through the iron of the ship's side like a white-hot
iron rod through paper.

A flicker of flame went up through the rising steam, and then
the Martian reeled and staggered.  In another moment he was cut down,
and a great body of water and steam shot high in the air.  The guns
of the Thunder Child sounded through the reek, going off one after
the other, and one shot splashed the water high close by the steamer,
ricocheted towards the other flying ships to the north, and smashed a
smack to matchwood.

But no one heeded that very much.  At the sight of the Martian's
collapse the captain on the bridge yelled inarticulately, and all the
crowding passengers on the steamer's stern shouted together.  And
then they yelled again.  For, surging out beyond the white tumult,
drove something long and black, the flames streaming from its middle
parts, its ventilators and funnels spouting fire.

She was alive still; the steering gear, it seems, was intact and
her engines working.  She headed straight for a second Martian, and
was within a hundred yards of him when the Heat-Ray came to bear.
Then with a violent thud, a blinding flash, her decks, her funnels,
leaped upward.  The Martian staggered with the violence of her
explosion, and in another moment the flaming wreckage, still driving
forward with the impetus of its pace, had struck him and crumpled him
up like a thing of cardboard: My brother shouted involuntarily.  A
boiling tumult of steam hid everything again.

"Two!" yelled the captain.

Everyone was shouting.  The whole steamer from end to end rang
with frantic cheering that was taken up first by one and then by all
in the crowding multitude of ships and boats that was driving out to
sea.

The steam hung upon the water for many minutes, hiding the third
Martian and the coast altogether.  And all this time the boat was
paddling steadily out to sea and away from the fight; and when at
last the confusion cleared, the drifting bank of black vapour
intervened, and nothing of the Thunder Child could be made out, nor
could the third Martian be seen.  But the ironclads to seaward were
now quite close and standing in towards shore past the steamboat.

The little vessel continued to beat its way seaward, and the
ironclads receded slowly towards the coast, which was hidden still by
a marbled bank of vapour, part steam, part black gas, eddying and
combining in the strangest way.  The fleet of refugees was scattering
to the northeast; several smacks were sailing between the ironclads
and the steamboat.  After a time, and before they reached the sinking
cloud bank, the warships turned northward, and then abruptly went
about and passed into the thickening haze of evening southward.  The
coast grew faint, and at last indistinguishable amid the low banks of
clouds that were gathering about the sinking sun.

Then suddenly out of the golden haze of the sunset came the
vibration of guns, and a form of black shadows moving.  Everyone
struggled to the rail of the steamer and peered into the blinding
furnace of the west, but nothing was to be distinguished clearly.  A
mass of smoke rose slanting and barred the face of the sun.  The
steamboat throbbed on its way through an interminable suspense.

The sun sank into grey clouds, the sky flushed and darkened, the
evening star trembled into sight.  It was deep twilight when the
captain cried out and pointed.  My brother strained his eyes.
Something rushed up into the sky out of the greyness--rushed
slantingly upward and very swiftly into the luminous clearness above
the clouds in the western sky; something flat and broad, and very
large, that swept round in a vast curve, grew smaller, sank slowly,
and vanished again into the grey mystery of the night.  And as it
flew it rained down darkness upon the land.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 1: Under Foot

In the first book I have wandered so much from my own adventures
to tell of the experiences of my brother that all through the last
two chapters I and the curate have been lurking in the empty house at
Halliford whither we fled to escape the Black Smoke.  There I will
resume.  We stopped there all Sunday night and all the next day--the
day of the panic--in a little island of daylight, cut off by the
Black Smoke from the rest of the world.  We could do nothing but wait
in aching inactivity during those two weary days.

My mind was occupied by anxiety for my wife.  I figured her at
Leatherhead, terrified, in danger, mourning me already as a dead man.
I paced the rooms and cried aloud when I though of how I was cut off
from her, of all that might happen to her in my absence.  My cousin I
knew was brave enough for any emergency, but he was not the sort of
man to realise danger quickly, to rise promptly.  What was needed now
was not bravery, but circumspection.  My only consolation was to
believe that the Martians were moving Londonward and away from her.
Such vague anxieties keep the mind sensitive and painful.  I grew
very weary and irritable with the curate's perpetual ejaculations; I
tired of the sight of his selfish despair.  After some ineffectual
remonstrance I kept away from him, staying in a room--evidently a
children's schoolroom --containing globes, forms, and copybooks.
When he followed me thither, I went to a box room at the top of the
house and, in order to be alone with my aching miseries, locked
myself in.

We were hopelessly hemmed in by the Black Smoke all that day and
the morning of the next.  There were signs of people in the next
house on Sunday evening--a face at a window and moving lights, and
later the slamming of a door.  But I do not know who these people
were, nor what became of them.  We saw nothing of them next day.  The
Black Smoke drifted slowly riverward all through Monday morning,
creeping nearer and nearer to us, driving at last along the roadway
outside the house that hid us.

A Martian came across the fields about midday, laying the stuff
with a jet of superheated steam that hissed against the walls,
smashed all the windows it touched, and scalded the curate's hand as
he fled out of the front room.  When at last we crept across the
sodden rooms and looked out again, the country northward was as
though a black snowstorm had passed over it.  Looking towards the
river, we were astonished to see an unaccountable redness mingling
with the black of the scorched meadows.

For a time we did not see how this change affected our
situation, save that we were relieved of our fear of the Black Smoke.
But later I perceived that we were no longer hemmed in, that now we
might get away.  So soon as I realised that the way of escape was
open, my dream of action returned.  But the curate was lethargic,
unreasonable.

"We are safe here," he repeated; "safe here."

I resolved to leave him--would that I had!  Wiser now for the
artilleryman's teaching, I sought out food and drink.  I had found
oil and rags for my burns, and I also took a hat and a flannel shirt
that I found in one of the bedrooms.  When it was clear to him that I
meant to go alone--had reconciled myself to going alone--he suddenly
roused himself to come.  And all being quiet throughout the
afternoon, we started about five o'clock, as I should judge, along
the blackened road to Sunbury.

In Sunbury, and at intervals along the road, were dead bodies
lying in contorted attitudes, horses as well as men, overturned carts
and luggage, all covered thickly with black dust.  That pall of
cindery powder made me think of what I had read of the destruction of
Pompeii.  We got to Hampton Court without misadventure, our minds
full of strange and unfamiliar appearances, and at Hampton Court our
eyes were relieved to find a patch of green that had escaped the
suffocating drift.  We went through Bushey Park, with its deer going
to and fro under the chestnuts, and some men and women hurrying in
the distance towards Hampton, and so we came to Twickenham.  These
were the first people we saw.

Away across the road the woods beyond Ham and Petersham were
still afire.  Twickenham was uninjured by either Heat-Ray or Black
Smoke, and there were more people about here, though none could give
us news.  For the most part they were like ourselves, taking
advantage of a lull to shift their quarters.  I have an impression
that many of the houses here were still occupied by scared
inhabitants, too frightened even for flight.  Here, too, the evidence
of a hasty rout was abundant along the road.  I remember most vividly
three smashed bicycles in a heap, pounded into the road by the wheels
of subsequent carts.  We crossed Richmond Bridge about half past
eight.  We hurried across the exposed bridge, of course, but I
noticed floating down the stream a number of red masses, some many
feet across.  I did not know what these were--there was no time for
scrutiny--and I put a more horrible interpretation on them than they
deserved.  Here again on the Surrey side were black dust that had
once been smoke, and dead bodies--a heap near the approach to the
station; but we had no glimpse of the Martians until we were some way
towards Barnes.

We saw in the blackened distance a group of three people running
down a side street towards the river, but otherwise it seemed
deserted.  Up the hill Richmond town was burning briskly; outside the
town of Richmond there was no trace of the Black Smoke.

Then suddenly, as we approached Kew, came a number of people
running, and the upperworks of a Martian fighting-machine loomed in
sight over the housetops, not a hundred yards away from us.  We stood
aghast at our danger, and had the Martian looked down we must
immediately have perished.  We were so terrified that we dared not go
on but turned aside and hid in a shed in a garden.  There the curate
crouched, weeping silently, and refusing to stir again.

But my fixed idea of reaching Leatherhead would not let me rest,
and in the twilight I ventured out again.  I went through a
shrubbery, and along a passage beside a big house standing in its own
grounds, and so emerged upon the road towards Kew.  The curate I left
in the shed, but he came hurrying after me.

That second start was the most foolhardy thing I ever did.  For
it was manifest the Martians were about us.  No sooner had the curate
overtaken me than we saw either the fighting-machine we had seen
before or another, far away across the meadows in the direction of
Kew Lodge.  Four or five little black figures hurried before it
across the green-grey of the field, and in a moment it was evident
this Martian pursued them.  In three strides he was among them, and
they ran radiating from his feet in all directions.  He used no
Heat-Ray to destroy them, but picked them up one by one.  Apparently
he tossed them into the great metallic carrier which projected behind
him, much as a workman's basket hangs over his shoulder.

It was the first time I realised that the Martians might have
any other purpose than destruction with defeated humanity.  We stood
for a moment petrified, then turned and fled through a gate behind us
into a walled garden, fell into, rather than found, a fortunate
ditch, and lay there, scarce daring to whisper to each other until
the stars were out.

I suppose it was nearly eleven o'clock before we gathered
courage to start again, no longer venturing into the road, but
sneaking along hedgerows and through plantations, and watching keenly
through the darkness, he on the right and I on the left, for the
Martians, who seemed to be all about us.  In one place we blundered
upon a scorched and blackened area, now cooling and ashen, and a
number of scattered dead bodies of men, burned horribly about the
heads and trunks but with their legs and boots mostly intact; and of
dead horses, fifty feet, perhaps, behind a line of four ripped guns
and smashed gun carriages.

Sheen, it seemed, had escaped destruction, but the place was
silent and deserted.  Here we happened on no dead, though the night
was too dark for us to see into the side roads of the place.  In
Sheen my companion suddenly complained of faintness and thirst, and
we decided to try one of the houses.

The first house we entered, after a little difficulty with the
window, was a small semi-detached villa, and I found nothing eatable
left in the place but some mouldy cheese.  There was, however, water
to drink; and I took a hatchet, which promised to be useful in our
next house-breaking.

We then crossed to a place where the road turns towards
Mortlake.  Here there stood a white house within a walled garden, and
in the pantry of this domicile we found a store of food--two loaves
of bread in a pan, an uncooked steak, and the half of a ham.  I give
this catalogue so precisely because, as it happened, we were destined
to subsist upon this store for the next fortnight.  Bottled beer
stood under a shelf, and there were two bags of haricot beans and
some limp lettaces.  This pantry opened into a kind of wash-up
kitchen, and in this was firewood; there was also a cupboard, in
which we found nearly a dozen of burgundy, tinned soups and salmon,
and two tins of biscuits.

We sat in the adjacent kitchen in the dark--for we dared not
strike a light--and ate bread and ham, and drank beer out of the same
bottle.  The curate, who was still timorous and restless, was now,
oddly enough, for pushing on, and I was urging him to keep up his
strength by eating when the thing happened that was to imprison us.

"It can't be midnight yet," I said, and then came a blinding
glare of vivid green light.  Everything in the kitchen leaped out,
clearly visible in green and black, and vanished again.  And then
followed such a concussion as I have never heard before or since.  So
close on the heels of this as to seem instantaneous came a thud
behind me, a clash of glass, a crash and rattle of falling masonry
all about us, and the plaster of the ceiling came down upon us,
smashing into a multitude of fragments upon our heads.  I was knocked
headlong across the floor against the oven handle and stunned.  I was
insensible for a long time, the curate told me, and when I came to we
were in darkness again, and he, with a face wet, as I found
afterwards, with blood from a cut forehead, was dabbing water over
me.

For some time I could not recollect what had happened.  Then
things came to me slowly.  A bruise on my temple asserted itself.

"Are you better?" asked the curate in a whisper.

At last I answered him.  I sat up.

"Don't move," he said.  "The floor is covered with smashed
crockery from the dresser.  You can't possibly move without making a
noise, and I fancy they are outside."

We both sat quite silent, so that we could scarcely hear each
other breathing.  Everything seemed deadly still, but once something
near us, some plaster or broken brickwork, slid down with a rumbling
sound.  Outside and very near was an intermittent, metallic rattle.

"That" said the curate, when presently it happened again.

"Yes," I said.  "But what is it?"

"A Martian!" said the curate.

I listened again.

"It was not like the Heat-Ray," I said, and for a time I was
inclined to think one of the great fighting-machines had stumbled
against the house, as I had seen one stumble against the tower of
Shepperton Church.

Our situation was so strange and incomprehensible that for three
or four hours, until the dawn came, we scarcely moved.  And then the
light filtered in, not through the window, which remained black, but
through a triangular aperture between a beam and a heap of broken
bricks in the wall behind us.  The interior of the kitchen we now saw
greyly for the first time.

The window had been burst in by a mass of garden mould, which
flowed over the table upon which we had been sitting and lay about
our feet.  Outside, the soil was banked high against the house.  At
the top of the window frame we could see an uprooted drainpipe.  The
floor was littered with smashed hardware; the end of the kitchen
towards the house was broken into, and since the daylight shone in
there, it was evident the greater part of the house had collapsed.
Contrasting vividly with this ruin was the neat dresser, stained in
the fashion, pale green, and with a number of copper and tin vessels
below it, the wallpaper imitating blue and white tiles, and a couple
of coloured supplements fluttering from the walls above the kitchen
range.

As the dawn grew clearer, we saw through the gap in the wall the
body of a Martian, standing sentinel, I suppose, over the still
glowing cylinder.  At the sight of that we crawled as circumspectly
as possible out of the twilight of the kitchen into the darkness of
the scullery.

Abruptly the right interpretation dawned upon my mind.

"The fifth cylinder," I whispered, "the fifth shot from Mars,
has struck this house and buried us under the ruins!"

For a time the curate was silent, and then he whispered:

"God have mercy upon us!"

I heard him presently whimpering to himself.

Save for that sound we lay quite still in the scullery; I for my
part scarce dared breathe, and sat with my eyes fixed on the faint
light of the kitchen door.  I could just see the curate's face, a
dim, oval shape, and his collar and cuffs.  Outside there began a
metallic hammering, then a violent hooting, and then again, after a
quiet interval, a hissing like the hissing of an engine.  These
noises, for the most part problematical, continued intermittently,
and seemed if anything to increase in number as time wore on.
Presently a measured thudding and a vibration that made everything
about us quiver and the vessels in the pantry ring and shift, began
and continued.  Once the light was eclipsed, and the ghostly kitchen
doorway became absolutely dark.  For many hours we must have crouched
there, silent and shivering, until our tired attention failed....

At last I found myself awake and very hungry.  I am inclined to
believe we must have spent the greater portion of a day before that
awakening.  My hunger was at a stride so insistent that it moved me
to action.  I told the curate I was going to seek food, and felt my
way towards the pantry.  He made me no answer, but so soon as I began
eating the faint noise I made stirred him up and I heard him crawling
after me.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 2: What We Saw from the Ruined House

After eating we crept back to the scullery, and there I must
have dozed again, for when presently I looked round I was alone.  The
thudding vibration continued with wearisome persistence.  I whispered
for the curate several times, and at last felt my way to the door of
the kitchen.  It was still daylight, and I perceived him across the
room, lying against the triangular hole that looked out upon the
Martians.  His shoulders were hunched, so that his head was hidden
from me.

I could hear a number of noises almost like those in an engine
shed; and the place rocked with that beating thud.  Through the
aperture in the wall I could see the top of a tree touched with gold
and the warm blue of a tranquil evening sky.  For a minute or so I
remained watching the curate, and then I advanced, crouching and
stepping with extreme care amid the broken crockery that littered the
floor.

I touched the curate's leg, and he started so violently that a
mass of plaster went sliding down outside and fell with a loud
impact.  I gripped his arm, fearing he might cry out, and for a long
time we crouched motionless.  Then I turned to see how much of our
rampart remained.  The detachment of the plaster had left a vertical
slit open in the debris, and by raising myself cautiously across a
beam I was able to see out of this gap into what had been overnight a
quiet suburban roadway.  Vast, indeed, was the change that we beheld.

The fifth cylinder must have fallen right into the midst of the
house we had first visited.  The building had vanished, completely
smashed, pulverised, and dispersed by the blow.  The cylinder lay now
far beneath the original foundations--deep in a hole, already vastly
larger than the pit I had looked into at Woking.  The earth all round
it had splashed under that tremendous impact--"splashed" is the only
word--and lay in heaped piles that hid the masses of the adjacent
houses.  It had behaved exactly like mud under the violent blow of a
hammer.  Our house had collapsed backward; the front portion even on
the ground floor, had been destroyed completely; by a chance the
kitchen and scullery had escaped, and stood buried now under soil and
ruins, closed in by tons of earth on every side save towards the
cylinder.  Over that aspect we hung now on the very edge of the great
circular pit the Martians were engaged in making.  The heavy beating
sound was evidently just behind us, and ever and again a bright green
vapour drove up like a veil across our peephole.

The cylinder was already opened in the centre of the pit, and on
the farther edge of the pit, amid the smashed and gravel-heaped
shrubbery, one of the great fighting machines, deserted by its
occupant, stood stiff and tall against the evening sky.  At first I
scarcely noticed the pit and the cylinder, although it has been
convenient to describe them first, on account of the extraordinary
glittering mechanism I saw busy in the excavation, and on account of
the strange creatures that were crawling slowly and painfully across
the heaped mould near it.

The mechanism it certainly was that held my attention first.  It
was one of those complicated fabrics that have since been called
handling-machines, and the study of which has already given such an
enormous impetus to terrestrial invention.  As it dawned upon me
first, it presented a sort of metallic spider with five jointed,
agile legs, and with an extraordinary number of jointed levers, bars,
and reaching and clutching tentacles about its body.
Most of its arms were retracted, but with three long tentacles it
was fishing out a number of rods, plates, and bars which lined the
covering and apparently strengthened the walls of the cylinder.
These, as it extracted them, were lifted out and deposited upon a
level surface of earth behind it.

Its motion was so swift, complex, and perfect that at first I
did not see it as a machine, in spite of its metallic glitter.  The
fighting-machines were coordinated and animated to an extraordinary
pitch, but nothing to compare with this.  People who have never seen
these structures, and have only the ill-imagined efforts of artists
or the imperfect descriptions of such eye-witnesses as myself to go
upon, scarcely realise that living quality.

I recall particularly the illustration of one of the first
pamphlets to give a consecutive account of the war.  The artist had
evidently made a hasty study of one of the fighting-machines, and
there his knowledge ended.  He presented them as tilted, stiff
tripods, without either flexibility or subtlety, and with an
altogether misleading monotony of effect.  The pamphlet containing
these renderings had a considerable vogue, and I mention them here
simply to warn the reader against the impression they may have
created.  They were no more like the Martians I saw in action than a
Dutch doll is like a human being.  To my mind, the pamphlet would
have been much better without them.

At first, I say, the handling-machine did not impress me as a
machine, but as a crablike creature with a glittering integument, the
controlling Martian whose delicate tentacles actuated its movements
seeming to be simply the equivalent of the crab's cerebral portion.
But then I perceived the resemblance of its grey-brown, shiny,
leathery integument to that of the other sprawling bodies beyond, and
the true nature of this dexterous workman dawned upon me.  With that
realization my interest shifted to those other creatures, the real
Martians.  Already I had had a transient impression of these, and the
first nausea no longer obscured my observation.  Moreover, I was
concealed and motionless, and under no urgency of action.

They were, I now saw, the most unearthly creatures it is
possible to conceive.  They were huge round bodies--or, rather,
heads--about four feet in diameter, each body having in front of it a
face.  This face had no nostrils--indeed, the Martians do not seem to
have had any sense of smell, but it had a pair of very large
dark-coloured eyes, and just beneath this a kind of fleshy beak.  In
the back of this head or body--I scarcely know how to speak of
it--was the single tight tympanic surface, since known to be
anatomically an ear, though it must have been almost useless in our
dense air.  In a group round the mouth were sixteen slender, almost
whiplike tentacles, arranged in two bunches of eight each.  These
bunches have since been named rather aptly, by that distinguished
anatomist, Professor Howes, the hands.  Even as I saw these Martians
for the first time they seemed to be endeavouring to raise themselves
on these hands, but of course, with the increased weight of
terrestrial conditions, this was impossible.  There is reason to
suppose that on Mars they may have progressed upon them with some
facility.

The internal anatomy, I may remark here, as dissection has since
shown, was almost equally simple.  The greater part of the structure
was the brain, sending enormous nerves to the eyes, ear, and tactile
tentacles.  Besides this were the bulky lungs, into which the mouth
opened, and the heart and its vessels.  The pulmonary distress caused
by the denser atmosphere and greater gravitational attraction was
only too evident in the convulsive movements of the outer skin.

And this was the sum of the Martian organs.  Strange as it may
seem to a human being, all the complex apparatus of digestion, which
makes up the bulk of our bodies, did not exist in the Martians.  They
were heads merely heads.  Entrails they had none.  They did not eat,
much less digest.  Instead, they took the fresh, living blood of
other creatures, and injected it into their own veins.  I have myself
seen this being done, as I shall mention in its place.  But,
squeamish as I may seem, I cannot bring myself to describe what I
could not endure even to continue watching.  Let it suffice to say,
blood obtained from a still living animal, in most cases from a human
being, was run directly by means of a little pipette into the
recipient canal....

The bare idea of this is no doubt horribly repulsive to us, but
at the same time I think that we should remember how repulsive our
carnivorous habits would seem to an intelligent rabbit.

The physiological advantages of the practice of injection are
undeniable, if one thinks of the tremendous waste of human time and
energy occasioned by eating and the digestive process.  Our bodies
are half made up of glands and tubes and organs, occupied in turning
heterogeneous food into blood.  The digestive processes and their
reaction upon the nervous system sap our strength and colour our
minds.  Men go happy or miserable as they have healthy or unhealthy
livers, or sound gastric glands.  But the Martians were lifted above
all these organic fluctuations of mood and emotion.

Their undeniable preference for men as their source of
nourishment is partly explained by the nature of the remains of the
victims they had brought with them as provisions from Mars.  These
creatures, to judge from the shrivelled remains that have fallen into
human hands, were bipeds with flimsy, silicious skeletons (almost
like those of the silicious sponges) and feeble musculature, standing
about six feet high and having round, erect heads, and large eyes in
flinty sockets.  Two or three of these seem to have been brought in
each cylinder, and all were killed before earth was reached.  It was
just as well for them, for the mere attempt to stand upright upon our
planet would have broken every bone in their bodies.

And while I am engaged in this description, I may add in this
place certain further details which, although they were not all
evident to us at the time, will enable the reader who is unacquainted
with them to form a clearer picture of these offensive creatures.

In three other points their physiology differed strangely from
ours.  Their organisms did not sleep, any more than the heart of man
sleeps.  Since they had no extensive muscular mechanism to
recuperate, that periodical extinction was unknown to them.  They had
little or no sense of fatigue, it would seem.  On earth they could
never have moved without effort, yet even to the last they kept in
action.  In twenty-four hours they did twenty-four hours of work, as
even on earth is perhaps the case with the ants.

In the next place, wonderful as it seems in a sexual world, the
Martians were absolutely without sex, and therefore without any of
the tumultuous emotions that arise from that difference among men.  A
young Martian, there can now be no dispute, was really born upon
earth during the war, and it was found attached to its parent,
partially budded off, just as young lilybulbs bud off, or like the
young animals in the fresh-water polyp.

In man, in all the higher terrestrial animals, such a method of
increase has disappeared; but even on this earth it was certainly the
primitive method.  Among the lower animals, up even to those first
cousins of the vertebrated animals, the Tunicates, the two processes
occur side by side, but finally the sexual method superseded its
competitor altogether.  On Mars, however, just the reverse has
apparently been the case.

It is worthy of remark that a certain speculative writer of
quasi-scientific repute, writing long before the Martian invasion,
did forecast for man a final structure not unlike the actual Martian
condition.  His prophecy, I remember, appeared in November or
December, 1893, in a long-defunct publication, the Pall Mall Budget,
and I recall a caricature of it in a pre-Martian periodical called
Punch.  He pointed out--writing in a foolish, facetious tone--that
the perfection of mechanical appliances must ultimately supersede
limbs; the perfection of chemical devices, digestion; that such
organs as hair, external nose, teeth, ears, and chin were no longer
essential parts of the human being, and that the tendency of natural
selection would lie in the direction of their steady diminution
through the coming ages.  The brain alone remained a cardinal
necessity.  Only one other part of the body had a strong case for
survival, and that was the hand, "teacher and agent of the brain."
While the rest of the body dwindled, the hands would grow larger.

There is many a true word written in jest, and here in the
Martians we have beyond dispute the actual accomplishment of such a
suppression of the animal side of the organism by the intelligence.
To me it is quite credible that the Martians may be descended from
beings not unlike ourselves, by a gradual development of brain and
hands (the latter giving rise to the two bunches of delicate
tentacles at last) at the expense of the rest of the body.  Without
the body the brain would, of course, become a mere selfish
intelligence, without any of the emotional substratum of the human
being.

The last salient point in which the systems of these creatures
differed from ours was in what one might have thought a very trivial
particular.  Micro-organisms, which cause so much disease and pain on
earth, have either never appeared upon Mars or Martian sanitary
science eliminated them ages ago.  A hundred diseases, all the fevers
and contagions of human life, consumption, cancers, tumours and such
morbidities, never enter the scheme of their life.  And speaking of
the differences between the life on Mars and terrestrial life, I may
allude here to the curious suggestions of the red weed.

Apparently the vegetable kingdom in Mars, instead of having
green for a dominant colour, is of a vivid blood red tint.  At any
rate, the seeds which the Martians (intentionally or accidentally)
brought with then, gave rise in all cases to red-coloured growths.
Only that known popularly as the red weed, however, gained any
footing in competition with terrestrial forms.  The red creeper was
quite a transitory growth, and few people have seen it growing.  For
a time, however, the red weed grew with astonishing vigour and
luxuriance.  It spread up the sides of the pit by the third or fourth
day of our imprisonment, an its cactus-like branches formed a carmine
fringe to the edges of our triangular window.  And afterwards I found
it broadcast throughout the country, and especially wherever there
was a stream of water.

The Martians had what appears to have been an auditory organ, a
single round drum at the back of the head-body, and eyes with a
visual range not very different from ours except that, according to
Philips, blue and violet were as black to them.  It is commonly
supposed that they communicated by sounds and tentacular
gesticulations; this is asserted, for instance, in the able but
hastily compiled pamphlet (written evidently by someone not an
eye-witness to Martian actions) to which I have already alluded, and
which, so far, has been the chief source of information concerning
them.  Now no surviving human being saw so much of the Martians in
action as I did.  I take no credit to myself for an accident, but the
fact is so.  And I assert that I watched them closely time after
time, and that I have seen four, five, and (once) six of them
sluggishly performing the most elaborately complicated operations
together without either sound or gesture.  Their peculiar hooting
invariably preceded feeding; it had no modulation, and was, I
believe, in no sense a signal, but merely the expiration of air
preparatory to the suctional operation.  I have a certain claim to at
least an elementary knowledge of psychology, and in this matter I am
convinced--as firmly as I am convinced of anything--that the Martians
interchanged thoughts without any physical intermediation.  And I
have been convinced of this in spite of strong preconceptions.
Before the Martian invasion, as an occasional reader here or there
may remember, I had written with some little vehemence against the
telepathic theory.

The Martians wore no clothing.  Their conceptions of ornament
and decorum were necessarily different from ours; and not only were
they evidently much less sensible of changes of temperature than we
are, but changes of pressure do not seem to have affected their
health at all seriously.  Yet though they wore no clothing, it was in
the other artificial additions to their bodily resources that their
great superiority over man lay.  We men, with our bicycles and
road-skates, our Lilienthal soaring-machines, our guns and sticks and
so forth, are just in the beginning of the evolution that the
Martians have worked out.  They have become practically mere brains,
wearing different bodies according to their needs just as men wear
suits of clothes and take a bicycle in a hurry or an umbrella in the
wet.  And of their appliances, perhaps nothing is more wonderful to a
man than the curious fact that what is the dominant feature of almost
all human devices in mechanism is absent--the wheel is absent; among
all the things they brought to earth there is no trace or suggestion
of their use of wheels.  One would have at least expected it in
locomotion.  And in this connection it is curious to remark that even
on this earth Nature has never hit upon the wheel, or has preferred
other expedients to its development.  And not only did the Martians
either not know of (which is incredible), or abstain from, the wheel,
but in their apparatus singularly little use is made of the fixed
pivot, or relatively fixed pivot, with circular motions thereabout
confined to one plane.  Almost all the joints of the machinery
present a complicated system of sliding parts moving over small but
beautifully curved friction bearings.  And while upon this matter of
detail, it is remarkable that the long leverages of their machines
are in most cases actuated by a sort of sham musculature of the disks
in an elastic sheath; these disks become polarised and drawn closely
and powerfully together when traversed by a current of electricity.
In this way the curious parallelism to animal motions, which was so
striking and disturbing to the human beholder, was attained.  Such
quasi-muscles abounded in the crablike handling-machine which, on my
first peeping out of the slit, I watched unpacking the cylinder.  It
seemed infinitely more alive than the actual Martians lying beyond it
in the sunset light, panting, stirring ineffectual tentacles, and
moving feebly after their vast journey across space.

While I was still watching their sluggish motions in the
sunlight, and noting each strange detail of their form, the curate
reminded me of his presence by pulling violently at my arm.  I turned
to a scowling face, and silent, eloquent lips.  He wanted the slit,
which permitted only one of us to peep through; and so I had to
forego watching them for a time while he enjoyed that privilege.

When I looked again, the busy handling-machine had already put
together several of the pieces of apparatus it had taken out of the
cylinder into a shape having an unmistakable likeness to its own; and
down on the left a busy little digging mechanism had come into view,
emitting jets of green vapour and working its way round the pit,
excavating and embarking in a methodical and discriminating manner.
This it was which had caused the regular beating noise, and the
rhythmic shocks that had kept our ruinous refuge quivering.  It piped
and whistled as it worked.  So far as I could see, the thing was
without a directing Martian at all.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 3: The Days of Imprisonment

The arrival of a second fighting-machine drove us from our
peephole into the scullery, for we feared that from his elevation the
Martian might see down upon us behind our barrier.  At a later date
we began to feel less in danger of their eyes, for to an eye in the
dale of the sunlight outside our refuge must have been blank
blackness, but at first the slightest suggestion of approach drove us
into the scullery in heart-throbbing retreat.  Yet terrible as was
the danger we incurred, the attraction of peeping was for both of us
irresistible.  And I recall now with a sort of wonder that, in spite
of the infinite danger in which we were between starvation and a
still more terrible death, we could yet struggle bitterly for that
horrible privilege of sight.  We would race across the kitchen in a
grotesque way between eagerness and the dread of making a noise, and
strike each other, and thrust and kick, within a few inches of
exposure.

The fact is that we had absolutely incompatible dispositions and
habits of thought and action, and our danger and isolation only
accentuated the incompatibility.  At Halliford I had already come to
hate the curate's trick of helpless exclamation, his stupid rigidity
of mind.  His endless muttering monologue vitiated every effort I
made to think out a line of action, and drove me at times, thus pent
up and intensified, almost to the verge of craziness.  He was as
lacking in restraint as a silly woman.  He would weep for hours
together, and I verily believe that to the very end this spoiled
child of life thought his weak tears in some way efficacious.  And I
would sit in the darkness unable to keep my mind off him by reason of
his importunities.  He ate more than I did, and it was in vain I
pointed out that our only chance of life was to stop in the house
until the Martians had done with their pit, that in that long
patience a time might presently come when we should need food.  He
ate an drank impulsively in heavy meals at long intervals.  He slept
little.

As the days wore on, his utter carelessness of any consideration
so intensified our distress and danger that I had, much as I loathed
doing it, to resort to threats, and at last to blows.  That brought
him to reason for a time.  But he was one of those weak creatures,
void of pride, timorous, anaemic, hateful souls, full of shifty
cunning, who face neither God nor man, who face not even themselves.

It is disagreeable for me to recall and write these things, but
I set them down that my story may lack nothing.  Those who have
escaped the dark and terrible aspects of life will find my brutality,
my flash of rage in our final tragedy, easy enough to blame; for they
know what is wrong as well as any, but not what is possible to
tortured men.  But those who have been under the shadow, who have
gone down at last to elemental things, will have a wider charity.

And while within we fought out our dark, dim contest of
whispers, matched food and drink, and gripping hands and blows,
without, in the pitiless sunlight of that terrible June, was the
strange wonder, the unfamiliar routine of the Martians in the pit.
Let me return to those first new experiences of mine.  After a long
time I ventured back to the peephole, to find that the new-comers had
been reinforced by the occupants of no fewer than three of the
fighting-machines.  These last had brought with them certain fresh
appliances that stood in an orderly manner about the cylinder.  The
second handling-machine was now completed, and was busied in serving
one of the novel contrivances the big machine had brought.  This was
a body resembling a milk can in its general form, above which
oscillated a pear-shaped receptacle, and from which a stream of white
powder flowed into a circular basin below.

The oscillatory motion was imparted to this by one tentacle of
the handling-machine.  With two spatulate hands the handling-machine
was digging out and flinging masses of clay into the pear-shaped
receptacle above, while with another arm it periodically opened a
door and removed rusty and blackened clinkers from the middle part of
the machine.  Another steely tentacle directed the powder from the
basin along a ribbed channel towards some receiver that was hidden
from me by the mound of bluish dust.  From this unseen receiver a
little thread of green smoke rose vertically into the quiet air.  As
I looked, the handling-machine, with a faint and musical clinking,
extended, telescopic fashion, a tentacle that had been a moment
before a mere blunt projection, until its end was hidden behind the
mound of clay.  In another second it had lifted a bar of white
aluminium into sight, untarnished as yet and shining dazzlingly, and
deposited it in a growing stack of bars that stood at the side of the
pit.  Between sunset and starlight this dexterous machine must have
made more than a hundred such bars out of the crude clay, and the
mound of bluish dust rose steadily until it topped the side of the
pit.

The contrast between the swift and complex movements of these
contrivances and the inert, panting clumsiness of their masters was
acute, and for days I had to tell myself repeatedly that these latter
were indeed the living of the two things.

The curate had possession of the slit when the first men were
brought to the pit.  I was sitting below, huddled up, listening with
all my ears.  He made a sudden movement backward, and I, fearful that
we were observed, crouched in a spasm of terror.  He came sliding
down the rubbish and crept beside me in the darkness, inarticulate,
gesticulating, and for a moment I shared his panic.  His gesture
suggested a resignation of the slit, and after a little while my
curiosity gave me courage, and I rose up, stepped across him, and
clambered up to it.  At first I could see no reason for his frantic
behaviour.  The twilight had now come, the stars were little and
faint, but the pit was illuminated by the flickering green fire that
came from the aluminium-making.  The whole picture was a flickering
scheme of green gleams and shifting rusty black shadows, strangely
trying to the eyes.  Over and through it all went the bats, heeding
it not at all.  The sprawling Martians were no longer to be seen, the
mound of blue-green powder had risen to cover them from sight, and a
fighting-machine, with its legs contracted, crumpled, and
abbreviated, stood across the corner of the pit.  And then, amid the
clangour of the machinery, came a drifting suspicion, of human
voices, that I entertained at first only to dismiss.

I crouched, watching this fighting-machine closely, satisfying
myself now for the first time that the hood did indeed contain a
Martian.  As the green flames lifted I could see the oily gleam of
his integument and the brightness of his eyes.  And suddenly I heard
a yell, and saw a long tentacle reaching over the shoulder of the
machine to the little cage that hunched upon its back.  Then
something--something struggling violently--was lifted high against
the sky, a black, vague enigma against the starlight; and as this
black object came down again, I saw by the green brightness that it
was a man.  For an instant he was clearly visible.  He was a stout,
ruddy, middle-aged man, well dressed; three days before, he must have
been walking the world, a man of considerable consequence.  I could
see his staring eyes and gleams of light on his studs and watch
chain.  He vanished behind the mound, and for a moment there was
silence.  And then began a shrieking and a sustained and cheerful
hooting from the Martians.

I slid down the rubbish, struggled to my feet, clapped my hands
over my ears, and bolted into the scullery.  The curate, who had been
crouching silently with his arms over his head, looked up as I
passed, cried out quite loudly at my desertion of him, and came
running after me.

That night, as we lurked in the scullery, balanced between our
horror and the terrible fascination this peeping had, although I felt
an urgent need of action I tried in vain to conceive some plan of
escape; but afterwards, during the second day, I was able to consider
our position with great clearness.  The curate, I found, was quite
incapable of discussion; this new and culminating atrocity had robbed
him of all vestiges of reason or forethought.  Practically he had
already sunk to the level of an animal.  But, as the saying goes, I
gripped myself with both hands.  It grew upon my mind, once I could
face the facts, that, terrible as our position was, there was as yet
no justification for absolute despair.  Our chief chance lay in the
possibility of the Martians making the pit nothing more than a
temporary encampment.  Or even if they kept it permanently, they
might not consider it necessary to guard it, and a chance of escape
might be afforded us.  I also weighed very carefully the possibility
of our digging a way out in a direction away from the pit, but the
chances of our emerging within sight of some sentinel
fighting-machine seemed at first too great.  And I should have had to
do all the digging myself.  The curate would certainly have failed
me.

It was on the third day, if my memory serves me right, that I
saw the lad killed.  It was the only occasion on which I actually saw
the Martians feed.  After that experience I avoided the hole in the
wall for the better part of a day.  I went into the scullery, removed
the door, and spent some hours digging with my hatchet as silently as
possible; but when I had made a hole about a couple of feet deep the
loose earth collapsed noisily, and I did not dare continue.  I lost
heart, and lay down on the scullery floor for a long time, having no
spirit even to move.  And after that I abandoned altogether the idea
of escaping by excavation.

It says much for the impression the Martians had made upon me
that at first I entertained little or no hope of our escape being
brought about by their overthrow through any human effort.  But on
the fourth or fifth night I heard a sound like heavy guns.

It was very late in the night, and the moon was shining
brightly.  The Martians had taken away the excavating machine, and,
save for a fighting-machine that stood in the remoter bank of the pit
and a handling-machine that was buried out of my sight in a corner of
the pit immediately beneath my peephole, the place was deserted by
them.  Except for the pale glow from the handling-machine and the
bars and patches of white moonlight, the pit was in darkness, and
except for the clinking of the handling-machine, quite still.  That
night was a beautiful serenity; save for one planet, the moon seemed
to have the sky to herself.  I heard a dog howling--and that familiar
sound it was that made me listen.  Then I heard quite distinctly a
booming exactly like the sound of great guns.  Six distinct reports I
counted, and after a long interval six again.  And that was all.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 4: The Death of the Curate

It was on the sixth day of our imprisonment that I peeped for
the last time, and presently found myself alone.  Instead of keeping
close to me and trying to oust me from the slit, the curate had gone
back into the scullery.  I was struck by a sudden thought.  I went
back quickly and quietly into the scullery.  In the darkness I heard
the curate drinking.  I snatched in the darkness, and my fingers
caught a bottle of burgundy.

For a few minutes there was a tussle.  The bottle struck the
floor and broke, and I desisted and rose.  We stood panting and
threatening each other.  In the end I planted myself between him and
the food, and told him of my determination to begin a discipline.  I
divided the food in the pantry into rations to last us ten days.  I
would not let him eat any more that day.  In the afternoon he made a
feeble effort to get at the food.  I had been dozing, but in an
instant I was awake.  All day and all night we sat face to face, I
weary but resolute, and he weeping and complaining of his immediate
hunger.  It was, I know, a night and a day, but to me it seemed--it
seems now--an interminable length of time.

And so our widened incompatibility ended at last in open
conflict.  For two vast days we struggled in undertones and wrestling
contests.  There were times when I beat and kicked him madly, times
when I cajoled and persuaded him, and once I tried to bribe him with
the last bottle of burgundy, for there was a rain-water pump from
which I could get water.  But neither force nor kindness availed; he
was indeed beyond reason.  He would neither desist from his attacks
on the food nor from his noisy babbling to himself.  The rudimentary
precautions to keep our imprisonment endurable he would not observe.
Slowly I began to realise the complete overthrow of his intelligence,
to perceive that my sole companion in this close and sickly darkness
was a man insane.

From certain vague memories, I am inclined to think my own mind
wandered at times.  I had strange and hideous dreams whenever I
slept.  It sounds paradoxical, but I am inclined to think that the
weakness and insanity of the curate warned me, braced me, and kept me
a sane man.

On the eighth day he began to talk aloud instead of whispering,
and nothing I could do would moderate his speech.

"It is just, O God!-" he would say, over and over again.  "It is
just.  On me and mine be the punishment laid.  We have sinned, we
have fallen short.  There was poverty, sorrow; the poor were trodden
in the dust, and I held my peace.  I preached acceptable folly--my
God, what folly! --when I should have stood up, though I died for it,
and called upon them to repent--repent! ...  Oppressors of the poor
and needy ...!  The wine press of God!"

Then he would suddenly revert to the matter of the food I
withheld from him, praying, begging, weeping, at last threatening.
He began to raise his voice--I prayed him not to.  He perceived a
hold on me--he threatened he would shout and bring the Martians upon
us.  For a time that scared me; but any concession would have
shortened our chance of escape beyond estimating.  I defied him,
although I felt no assurance that he might not do this thing.  But
that day, at any rate, he did not.  He talked with his voice rising
slowly, through the greater part of the eighth and ninth
days--threats, entreaties, mingled with a torrent of half-sane and
always frothy repentance for his vacant sham of God's service, such
as made me pity him.  Then he slept awhile, and began again with
renewed strength, so loudly that I must needs make him desist.

"Be still!" I implored.

He rose to his knees, for he had been sitting in the darkness
near the copper.

"I have been still too long," he said, in a tone that must have
reached the pit, "and now I must bear my witness.  Woe unto this
unfaithful city!  Woe!  Woe!  Woe!  Woe!  Woe!  To the inhabitants of
the earth by reason of the other voices of the trumpet---"

"Shut up!" I said, rising to my feet, and in a terror lest the
Martians should hear us.  "For God's sake---"

"Nay," shouted the curate, at the top of his voice, standing
likewise and extending his arms.  "Speak!  The word of the Lord is
upon me!"

In three strides he was at the door leading into the kitchen.

"I must bear my witness!  I go!  It has already been too long
delayed."

I put out my hand and felt the meat chopper hanging to the wall.
In a flash I was after him.  I was fierce with fear.  Before he was
halfway across the kitchen I had overtaken him.  With one last touch
of humanity I turned the blade back and struck him with the butt.  He
went headlong forward and lay stretched on the ground.  I stumbled
over him and stood panting.  He lay still.

Suddenly I heard a noise without, the run and smash of slipping
plaster, and the triangular aperture in the wall was darkened.  I
looked up and saw the lower surface of a handling-machine coming
slowly across the hole.  One of its gripping limbs curled amid the
debris; another limb appeared, feeling its way over the fallen beams.
I stood petrified, staring.  Then I saw through a sort of glass plate
near the edge of the body the face, as we may call it, and the large
dark eyes of a Martian, peering, and then a long metallic snake of
tentacle came feeling slowly through the hole.

I turned by an effort, stumbled over the curate, and stopped at
the scullery door.  The tentacle was now some way, two yards or more,
in the room, and twisting and turning, with queer sudden movements,
this way and that.  For a while I stood fascinated by that slow,
fitful advance.  Then, with a faint, hoarse cry, I forced myself
across the scullery.  I trembled violently; I could scarcely stand
upright.  I opened the door of the coal cellar, and stood there in
the darkness staring at the faintly lit doorway into the kitchen, and
listening.  Had the Martian seen me?  What was it doing now?

Something was moving to and fro there, very quietly; every now
and then it tapped against the wall, or started on its movements with
a faint metallic ringing, like the movements of keys on a split-ring.
Then a heavy body--I knew too well what--was dragged across the floor
of the kitchen towards the opening.  Irresistibly attracted, I crept
to the door and peeped into the kitchen.  In the triangle of bright
outer sunlight I saw, the Martian, in its Briareus of a
handling-machine, scrutinising the curate's head.  I thought at once
that it would infer my presence from the mark of the blow I had given
him.

I crept back to the coal cellar, shut the door, and began to
cover myself up as much as I could, and as noiselessly as possible in
the darkness, among the firewood and coal therein.  Every now and
then I paused, rigid, to hear if the Martian had thrust its tentacles
through the opening again.

Then the faint metallic, jingle returned.  I traced it slowly
feeling over the kitchen.  Presently I heard it nearer--in the
scullery, as I judged.  I thought that its length might be
insufficient to reach me.  I prayed copiously.  It passed, scraping
faintly across the cellar door.  An age of almost intolerable
suspense intervened; then I heard it fumbling at the latch!  It had
found the door.  The Martians understood doors!

It worried at the catch for a minute, perhaps, and then the door
opened.

In the darkness I could just see the thing--like an elephant's
trunk more than anything else--waving towards me and touching and
examining the wall, coals, wood and ceiling.  It was like a black
worm swaying its blind head to and fro.

Once, even, it touched the heel of my boot.  I was on the verge
of screaming; I bit my hand.  For a time the tentacle was silent.  I
could have fancied it had been withdrawn.  Presently, with an abrupt
click, it gripped something--I thought it had me!--and seemed to go
out of the cellar again.  For a minute I was not sure.  Apparently it
had taken a lump of coal to examine.

I seized the opportunity of slightly shifting my position, which
had become cramped, and then listened.  I whispered passionate
prayers for safety.

Then I heard the slow, deliberate sound creeping towards me
again.  Slowly, slowly it drew near, scratching against the walls and
tapping the furniture.

While I was still doubtful, it rapped smartly against the cellar
door and closed it.  I heard it go into the pantry, and the
biscuit-tins rattled and a bottle smashed, and then came a heavy bump
against the cellar door.  Then silence that passed into an infinity
of suspense.

Had it gone?

At last I decided that it had.

It came into the scullery no more; but I lay all the tenth day
in the close darkness, buried among coals and firewood, not daring
even to crawl out for the drink for which I craved.  It was the
eleventh day before I ventured so far from my security.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 5: The Stillness

My first act before I went into the pantry was to fasten the
door between the kitchen and the scullery.  But the pantry was empty;
every scrap of food had gone.  Apparently, the Martian had taken it
all on the previous day.  At that discovery I despaired for the first
time.  I took no food, or no drink either, on the eleventh or the
twelfth day.

At first my mouth and throat were parched, and my strength ebbed
sensibly.  I sat about in the darkness of the scullery, in a state of
despondent wretchedness.  My mind ran on eating.  I thought I had
become deaf, for the noises of movement I had been accustomed to hear
from the pit had ceased absolutely.  I did not feel strong enough to
crawl noiselessly to the peephole, or I would have gone there.

On the twelfth day my throat was so painful that, taking the
chance of alarming the Martians, I attacked the creaking rain-water
pump that stood by the sink, and got a couple of glassfuls of
blackened and tainted rain water.  I was greatly refreshed by this,
and emboldened by the fact that no enquiring tentacle followed the
noise of my pumping.

During these days, in a rambling, inconclusive way, I thought
much of the curate and of the manner of his death.

On the thirteenth day I drank some more water, and dozed and
thought disjointedly of eating and of vague impossible plans of
escape.  Whenever I dozed I dreamt of horrible phantasms, of the
death of the curate, or of sumptuous dinners; but, asleep or awake, I
felt a keen pain that urged me to drink again and again.  The light
that came into the scullery was no longer grey, but red.  To my
disordered imagination it seemed the colour of blood.

On the fourteenth day I went into the kitchen, and I was
surprised to find that the fronds of the red weed had grown right
across the hole in the wall, turning the half-light of the place into
a crimson-coloured obscurity.

It was early on the fifteenth day that I heard a curious,
familiar sequence of sounds in the kitchen, and, listening,
identified it as the snuffing and scratching of a dog.  Going into
the kitchen, I saw a dog's nose peering in through a break among the
ruddy fronds.  This greatly surprised me.  At the scent of me he
barked shortly.

I thought if I could induce him to come into the place quietly I
should be able, perhaps, to kill and eat him; and in any case, it
would be advisable to kill him, lest his actions attracted the
attention of the Martians.

I crept forward, saying "Good dog!" very softly; but he suddenly
withdrew his head and disappeared.

I listened--I was not deaf--but certainly the pit was still.  I
heard a sound like the flutter of a bird's wings, and a hoarse
croaking, but that was all.

For a long while I lay close to the peephole, but not daring to
move aside the red plants that obscured it.  Once or twice I heard a
faint pitter-patter like the feet of the dog going hither and thither
on the sand far below me, and there were more birdlike sounds, but
that was all.  At length, encouraged by the silence, I looked out.

Except in the corner, where a multitude of crows hopped and
fought over the skeletons of the dead the Martians had consumed,
there was not a living thing in the pit.

I stared about me, scarcely believing my eyes.  All the
machinery had gone.  Save for the big mound of greyish-blue powder in
one corner, certain bars of aluminium in another, the black birds,
and the skeletons of the killed, the place was merely an empty
circular pit in the sand.

Slowly I thrust myself out through the red weed, and stood upon
the mound of rubble.  I could see in any direction save behind me, to
the north, and neither Martians nor sign of Martians were to be seen.
The pit dropped sheerly from my feet, but a little way along the
rubbish afforded a practicable slope to the summit of the ruins.  My
chance of escape had come.  I began to tremble.

I hesitated for some time, and then, in a gust of desperate
resolution, and with a heart that throbbed violently, I scrambled to
the top of the mound in which I had been buried so long.

I looked about again.  To the northward, too, no Martian was
visible.

When I had last seen this part of Sheen in the daylight it had
been a straggling street of comfortable white and red houses,
interspersed with abundant shady trees.  Now I stood on a mound of
smashed brickwork, clay, and gravel, over which spread a multitude of
red cactus-shaped plants, knee-high, without a solitary terrestrial
growth to dispute their footing.  The trees near me were dead and
brown, but further a network of red thread scaled the still living
stems.

The neighbouring houses had all been wrecked, but none had been
burned; their walls stood, sometimes to the second story, with
smashed windows and shattered doors.  The red weed grew tumultuously
in their roofless rooms.  Below me was the great pit, with the crows
struggling for its refuse.  A number of other birds hopped about
among the ruins.  Far away I saw a gaunt cat slink crouchingly along
a wall, but traces of men there were none.

The day seemed, by contrast with my recent confinement,
dazzlingly bright, the sky a glowing blue.  A gentle breeze kept the
red weed that covered every scrap of unoccupied ground gently
swaying.  And oh! the sweetness of the air!

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 6: The Work of Fifteen Days

For some time I stood tottering on the mound regardless of my
safety.  Within that noisome den from which I had emerged I had
thought with a narrow intensity only of our immediate security.  I
had not realised what had been happening to the world, had not
anticipated this startling vision of unfamiliar things.  I had
expected to see Sheen in ruins--I found about me the landscape, weird
and lurid, of another planet.

For that moment I touched an emotion beyond the common range of
men, yet one that the poor brutes we dominate know only too well.  I
felt as a rabbit might feel returning to his burrow and suddenly
confronted by the work of a dozen busy navvies digging the
foundations of a house.  I felt the first inkling of a thing that
presently grew quite clear in my mind, that oppressed me for many
days, a sense of dethronement, a persuasion that I was no longer a
master, but an animal among the animals, under the Martian heel.
With us it would be as with them, to lurk and watch, to run and hide;
the fear and empire of man had passed away.

But so soon as this strangeness had been realised it passed, and
my dominant motive became the hunger of my long and dismal fast.  In
the direction away from the pit I saw, beyond a red-covered wall, a
patch of garden ground unburied.  This gave me a hint, and I went
knee-deep, and sometimes neck-deep, in the red weed.  The density of
the weed gave me a reassuring sense of hiding.  The wall was some six
feet high, and when I attempted to clamber it I found I could not
lift my feet to the crest.  So I went along by the side of it, and
came to a corner and a rockwork that enabled me to get to the top,
and tumble into the garden I coveted.  Here I found some young
onions, a couple of gladiolus bulbs, and a quantity of immature
carrots, all of which I secured, and, scrambling over a ruined wall,
went on my way through scarlet and crimson trees towards Kew--it was
like walking through an avenue of gigantic blood drops--possessed
with two ideas: to get more food, and to limp, as soon and as far as
my strength permitted, out of this accursed unearthly region of the
pit.

Some way farther, in a grassy place, was a group of mushrooms
which also I devoured, and then I came upon a brown sheet of flowing
shallow water, where meadows used to be.  These fragments of
nourishment served only to whet my hunger.  At first I was surprised
at this flood in a hot, dry summer, hut afterwards I discovered that
it was caused by the tropical exuberance of the red weed.  Directly
this extraordinary growth encountered water it straightway became
gigantic and of unparalleled fecundity.  Its seeds were simply poured
down into the water of the Wey and Thames, and its swiftly growing
and titanic water fronds speedily choked both those rivers.

At Putney, as I afterwards saw, the bridge was almost lost in a
tangle of this weed, and at Richmond, too, the Thames water poured in
a broad and shallow stream across the meadows of Hampton and
Twickerham.  As the water spread the weed followed them, until the
ruined villas of the Thames valley were for a time lost in this red
swamp, whose margin I explored, and much of the desolation the
Martians had caused was concealed.

In the end the red weed succumbed almost as quickly as it had
spread.  A cankering disease, due, it is believed, to the action of
certain bacteria, presently seized upon it.  Now by the action of
natural selection, all terrestrial plants have acquired a resisting
power against bacterial diseases--they never succumb without a severe
struggle, but the red weed rotted like a thing already dead.  The
fronds became bleached, and then shrivelled and brittle.  They broke
off at the least touch, and the waters that had stimulated their
early growth carried their last vestiges out to sea.

My first act on coming to this water was, of course, to slake my
thirst.  I drank a great deal of it and, moved by an impulse, gnawed
some fronds of red weed; but they were watery, and had a sickly,
metallic taste.  I found the water was sufficiently shallow for me to
wade securely, although the red weed impeded my feet a little; but
the flood evidently got deeper towards the river, and I turned back
to Mortlake.  I managed to make out the road by means of occasional
ruins of its villas and fences and lamps, and so presently I got out
of this spate and made my way to the hill going up towards Roehampton
and came out on Putney Common.

Here the scenery changed from the strange and unfamiliar to the
wreckage of the familiar: patches of ground exhibited the devastation
of a cyclone, and in a few score yards I would come upon perfectly
undisturbed spaces, houses with their blinds trimly drawn and doors
closed, as if they had been left for a day by the owners, or as if
their inhabitants slept within.  The red weed was less abundant; the
tall trees along the lane were free from the red creeper.  I hunted
for food among the trees, finding nothing, and I also raided a couple
of silent houses, but they had already been broken into and
ransacked.  I rested for the remainder of the daylight in a
shrubbery, being, in my enfeebled condition, too fatigued to push on.

All this time I saw no human beings, and no signs of the
Martians.  I encountered a couple of hungry-looking dogs, but both
hurried circuitously away from the advances I made them.  Near
Roehampton I had seen two human skeletons--not bodies, but skeletons,
picked clean --and in the wood by me I found the crushed and
scattered bones of several cats and rabbits and the skull of a sheep.
But though I gnawed parts of these in my mouth, there was nothing to
be got from them.

After sunset I struggled on along the road towards Putney, where
I think the Heat-Ray must have been used for some reason.  And in the
garden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of immature potatoes,
sufficient to stay my hunger.  From this garden one looked down upon
Putney and the river.  The aspect of the place in the dusk was
singularly desolate: blackened trees, blackened, desolate ruins, and
down the hill the sheets of the flooded river, red-tinged with the
weed.  And over all--silence.  It filled me with indescribable terror
to think how swiftly that desolating change had come.

For a time I believed that mankind had been swept out of
existence, and that I stood there alone, the last man left alive.
Hard by the top of Putney Hill I came upon another skeleton, with the
arms dislocated and removed several yards from the rest of the body.
As I proceeded I became more and more convinced that the
extermination of mankind was, save for such stragglers as myself,
already accomplished in this part of the world.  The Martians, I
thought, had gone on and left the country desolated, seeking food
elsewhere.  Perhaps even now they were destroying Berlin or Paris, or
it might be they had gone northward.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 7: The Man on Putney Hill

I spent that night in the inn that stands at the top of Putney
Hill, sleeping in a made bed for the first time since my flight to
Leatherhead.  I will not tell the needless trouble I had breaking
into that house--afterwards I found the front door was on the
latch--nor how I ransacked every room for food, until just on the
verge of despair, in what seemed to me to be a servant's bedroom I
found a rat-gnawed crust and two tins of pineapple.  The place had
been already searched and emptied.  In the bar I afterwards found
some biscuits and sandwiches that had been overlooked.  The latter I
could not eat, they were too rotten, but the former not only stayed
my hunger, but filled my pockets.  I lit no lamps, fearing some
Martian might come beating that part of London for food in the night.
Before I went to bed I had an interval of restlessness, and prowled
from window to window, peering out for some sign of these monsters.
I slept little.  As I lay in bed I found myself thinking
consecutively--a thing I do not remember to have done since my last
argument with the curate.  During all the intervening time my mental
condition had been a hurrying succession of vague emotional states or
a sort of stupid receptivity.  But in the night my brain, reinforced,
I suppose, by the food I had eaten, grew clear again, and I thought.

Three things struggled for possession of my mind: the killing of
the curate, the whereabouts of the Martians, and the possible fate of
my wife.  The former gave me no sensation of horror or remorse to
recall; I saw it simply as a thing done, a memory infinitely
disagreeable but quite without the quality of remorse.  I saw myself
then as I see myself now, driven step by step towards that hasty
blow, the creature of a sequence of accidents leading inevitably to
that.  I felt no condemnation; yet the memory, static, unprogressive,
haunted me.  In the silence of the night, with that sense of the
nearness of God that sometimes comes into the stillness and the
darkness, I stood my trial, my only trial, for that moment of wrath
and fear.  I retraced every step of our conversation from the moment
when I had found him crouching beside me, heedless of my thirst, and
pointing to the fire and smoke that streamed up from the ruins of
Weybridge.  We had been incapable of co-operation--grim chance had
taken no heed of that.  Had I foreseen, I should have left him at
Halliford.  But I did not foresee; and crime is to foresee and do.
And I set this down as I have set all this story down, as it was.
There were no witnesses--all these things I might have concealed.
But I set it down, and the reader must form his judgment as he will.

And when, by an effort, I had set aside that picture of a
prostrate body, I faced the problem of the Martians and the fate of
my wife.  For the former I had no data; I could imagine a hundred
things, and so, unhappily, I could for the latter.  And suddenly that
night became terrible.  I found myself sitting up in bed, staring at
the dark.  I found myself praying that the Heat-Ray might have
suddenly and painlessly struck her out of being.  Since the night of
my return from Leatherhead I had not prayed.  I had uttered prayers,
fetish prayers, had prayed as heathens mutter charms when I was in
extremity; but now I prayed indeed, pleading steadfastly and sanely,
face to face with the darkness of God.  Strange night!  Strangest in
this, that so soon as dawn had come, I, who had talked with God,
crept out of the house like a rat leaving its hiding place--a
creature scarcely larger, an inferior animal, a thing that for any
passing whim of our masters might be hunted and killed.  Perhaps they
also prayed confidently to God.  Surely, if we have learned nothing
else, this war has taught us pity--pity for those witless souls that
suffer our dominion.

The morning was bright and fine, and the eastern sky flowed
pink, and was fretted with little golden clouds.  In the road that
runs from the top of Putney Hill to Wimbledon was a number of poor
vestiges of the panic torrent that must have poured Londonward on the
Sunday night after the fighting began.  There was a little
two-wheeled cart inscribed with the name of Thomas Lobb, Greengrocer,
New Maiden, with a smashed wheel and an abandoned tin trunk; there
was a straw hat trampled into the now hardened mud, and at the top of
West Hill a lot of blood-stained glass about the overturned water
trough.  My movements were languid, my plans of the vaguest.  I had
idea of going to Leatherhead, though I knew that there I had the
poorest chance of finding my wife.  Certainly, unless death had
overtaken them suddenly, my cousins and she would have fled thence;
but it seemed to me I might find or learn there whither the Surrey
people had fled.  I knew I wanted to find my wife, that my heart
ached for her and the world of men, but I had no clear idea how the
finding might be done.  I was also sharply aware now of my intense
loneliness.  From the corner I went, under cover of a thicket of
trees and bushes, to the edge of Wimbledon Common, stretching wide
and far.

That dark expanse was lit in patches by yellow gorse and broom;
there was no red weed to be seen, and as I prowled, hesitating, on
the verge of the open, the sun rose, flooding it all with light and
vitality.  I came upon a busy swarm of little frogs in a swampy place
among the trees.  I stopped to look at them, drawing a lesson from
their stout resolve to live.  And presently, turning suddenly, with
an odd feeling of being watched, I beheld something crouching amid a
clump of bushes.  I stood regarding this.  I made a step towards it,
and it rose up and became a man armed with a cutlass.  I approached
him slowly.  He stood silent and motionless, regarding me.

As I drew nearer I perceived he was dressed in clothes as dusty
and filthy as my own; he looked, indeed, as though he had been
dragged through a culvert.  Nearer, I distinguished the green slime
of ditches mixing with the pale drab of dried clay and shiny, coaly
patches.  His black hair fell over his eyes, and his face was dark
and dirty and sunken, so that at first I did not recognise him.
There was a red cut across the lower part of his face.

"Stop!" he cried, when I was within ten yards of him, and I
stopped.  His voice was hoarse.  "Where do you come from?" he said.

I thought, surveying him.

"I come from Mortlake," I said. "I was buried near the pit the
Martians made about their cylinder.  I have worked my way out and
escaped."

"There is no food about here," he said.  "This is my country.
All this hill down to the river, and back to Clapham, and up to the
edge of the common.  There is only food for one.  Which way are you
going?"

I answered slowly.

"I don't know," I said.  "I have been buried in the ruins of a
house thirteen or fourteen days.  I don't know what has happened."

He looked at me doubtfully, then started, and looked with a
changed expression.

"I've no wish to stop about here," said I.  "I think I shall go
to Leatherhead, for my wife was there."

He shot out a pointing finger.

"It is you," said he; "the man from Woking.  And you weren't
killed at Weybridge?"

I recognised him at the same moment.

"You are the artilleryman who came into my garden."

"Good luck!" he said.  "We are lucky ones!  Fancy you!"  He put
out a hand, and I took it.  "I crawled up a drain," he said.  "But
they didn't kill everyone.  And after they went away I got off
towards Walton across the fields.  But--- It's not sixteen days
altogether--and your hair is grey."  He looked over his shoulder
suddenly.  "Only a rook," he said.  "One gets to know that birds have
shadows these days.  This is a bit open.  Let us crawl under those
bushes and talk."

"Have you seen any Martians?" I said.  "Since I crawled out---"

"They've gone away across London," he said.  "I guess they've
got a bigger camp there.  Of a night, all over there, Hampstead way,
the sky is alive with their lights.  It's like a great city, and in
the glare you can just see them moving.  By daylight you can't.  But
nearer--I haven't seen them--" (he counted on his fingers) "five
days.  Then I saw a couple across Hammersmith way carrying something
big.  And the night before last"--he stopped and spoke
impressively--"it was just a matter of lights, but it was something
up in the air.  I believe they've built a flying-machine, and are
learning to fly."

I stopped, on hands and knees, for we had come to the bushes.

"Fly!"

"Yes," he said, "fly."

I went on into a little bower, and sat down.

"It is all over with humanity," I said.  "If they can do that
they will simply go round the world."

He nodded.

"They will.  But--- It will relieve things over here a bit.  And
besides--" He looked at me.  "Aren't you satisfied it is up with
humanity?  I am.  We're down; we're beat."

I stared.  Strange as it may seem, I had not arrived at this
fact--a fact perfectly obvious so soon as he spoke.  I had still held
a vague hope; rather, I had kept a lifelong habit of mind.  He
repeated his words, "We're beat."  They carried absolute conviction.

"It's all over," he said.  "They've lost one--just one.  And
they've made their footing good and crippled the greatest power in
the world.  They've walked over us.  The death of that one at
Weybridge was an accident.  And these are only pioneers.  They kept
on coming.  These green stars--I've seen none these five or six days,
but I've no doubt they're falling somewhere every night.  Nothing's
to be done.  We're under!  We're beat!"

I made him no answer.  I sat staring before me, trying in vain
to devise some countervailing thought.

"This isn't a war," said the artilleryman.  "It never was, a
war, any more than there's war between man and ants.

Suddenly I recalled the night in the observatory.

"After the tenth shot, they fired no more--at least, until the
first cylinder came."

"How do you know?" said the artilleryman.  I explained.  He
thought.  "Something wrong with the gun," he said.  "But what if
there is?  They'll get it right again.  And even if there's a delay,
how can it alter the end?  It's just men and ants.  There's the ants
builds their cities, live their lives, have wars, revolutions, until
the men want them out of the way, and then they go out of the way.
That's what we are now--just ants.  Only---"

"Yes," I said.

"We're eatable ants."

We sat looking at each other.

"And what will they do with us?" I said.

"That's what I've been thinking," he said; "that's what I've
been thinking.  After Weybridge I went south--thinking.  I saw what
was up.  Most of the people were hard at it squealing and exciting
themselves.  But I'm not so fond of squealing.  I've been in sight of
death once or twice; I'm not an ornamental soldier, and at the best
and worst, death--it's just death.  And it's the man that keeps on
thinking comes through.  I saw everyone tracking away south.  Says I,
`Food won't last this way,' and I turned right back.  I went for the
Martians like a sparrow goes for man.  All round"--he waved a hand to
the horizon--"they're starving in heaps, bolting, treading on each
other...."

He saw my face, and halted awkwardly.

"No doubt lots who had money have gone away to France," he said.
He seemed to hesitate whether to apologise, met my eyes, and went on:
"There's food all about here.  Canned things in shops; wines,
spirits, mineral waters; and the water mains and drains are empty.
Well, I was telling you what I was thinking.  `Here's intelligent
things,' I said, `and it seems they want us for food.  First, they'll
smash us up--ships, machines, guns, cities, all the order and
organisation.  All that will go.  If we were the size of ants we
might pull through.  But we're not.  It's all too bulky to stop.
That's the first certainty.'  Eh?"

"It is; I've thought it out.  Very well, then--next; at present
we're caught as we're wanted.  A Martian has only to go a few miles
to get a crowd on the run.  And I saw one, one day, out by
Wandsworth, picking houses to pieces and routing among the wreckage.
But they won't keep on doing that.  So soon as they've settled all
our guns and ships, and smashed our railways, and done all the things
they are doing over there, they will begin catching us systematic,
picking the best and storing us in cages and things.  That's what
they will start doing in a bit.  Lord!  They haven't begun on us yet.
Don't you see that?"

"Not begun!" I exclaimed.

"Not begun.  All that's happened so far is through our not
having the sense to keep quiet--worrying them with guns and such
foolery.  And losing our heads, and rushing off crowds to where there
wasn't any more safety than where we were.  They don't want to bother
us yet.  They're making their things--making all the things they
couldn't bring with them, getting things ready for the rest of their
people.  Very likely that's why the cylinders have stopped for a bit,
for fear of hitting those who are here.  And instead of our rushing
about blind, on the howl, or getting dynamite on the chance of
busting them up, we've got to fix ourselves up according to the new
state of affairs.  That's how I figure it out.  It isn't quite
according to what a man wants for his species, but it's about what
the facts point to.  And that's the principle I acted upon.  Cities,
nations, civilisation, progress--it's all over.  That game's up.
We're beat."

"But if that is so, what is there to live for?"

The artilleryman looked at me for a moment.

"There won't be any more blessed concerts for a million years or
so; there won't be any Royal Academy of Arts, and no nice little
feeds at restaurants.  If its amusement you're after, I reckon the
game is up.  If you've got any drawing-room manners or a dislike to
eating peas with a knife or dropping aitches, you'd better chuck `em
away.  They ain't no further use.

"You mean---"

"I mean that men like me are going on living--for the sake of
the breed.  I tell you, I'm grim set on living.  And if I'm not
mistaken, you'll show what insides you've got, too, before long.  We
aren't going to be exterminated.  And I don't mean to be caught
either, and tamed and fattened and bred like a thundering ox.  Ugh!
Fancy those brown creepers!"

"You don't mean to say---"

"I do.  I'm going on.  Under their feet.  I've got it planned;
I've thought it out.  We men are beat.  We don't know enough.  We've
got to learn before we've got a chance.  And we've got to live and
keep independent while we learn.  See!  That's what has to be done."

I stared, astonished, and stirred profoundly by the man's
resolution.

"Great God!" cried I.  "But you are a man indeed!"  And suddenly
I gripped his hand.

"Eh!" he said, with his eyes shining.  "I've thought it out,
eh?"

"Go on," I said.

"Well, those who mean to escape their catching must get ready.
I'm getting ready.  Mind you, it isn't all of us that are made for
wild beasts; and that's what it's got to be.  That's why I watched
you.  I had my doubts.  You're slender.  I didn't know that it was
you, you see, or just how you'd been buried.  All these--the sort of
people that lived in these houses, and all those little clerks
that used to live down that way--they'd be no good.  They haven't any
spirit in them--no proud dreams and no proud lusts; and a man who
hasn't one or the other--Lord!  What is he but funk and precautions?
They just used to skedaddle off to work--I've seen hundreds of `em,
bit of breakfast in hand, running wild and shining to catch their
little season-ticket train for fear they'd get dismissed if they
didn't; working at businesses they were afraid to take the trouble to
understand; skedaddling back for fear they wouldn't be in time for
dinner; keeping indoors after dinner for fear of the back streets,
and sleeping with the wives they married, not because they wanted
them, but because they had a bit of money that would make for safety
in their one little miserable skedaddle through the world.  Lives
insured and a bit invested for fear of accidents.  And on
Sundays--fear of the hereafter.  As if hell was built for rabbits.
Well, the Martians will just be a godsend to these.  Nice roomy
cages, fattening food, careful breeding, no worry.  After a week or
so chasing about the fields and lands on empty stomachs, they'll come
and be caught cheerful.  They'll be quite glad after a bit.  They'll
wonder what people did before there were Martians to take care of
them.  And the bar loafers, and mashers, and singers--I can imagine
them.  I can imagine them," he said, with a sort of sombre
gratification.  "There'll be any amount of sentiment and religion
loose among them.  There's hundreds of things I saw with my eyes that
I've only begun to see clearly these last few days.  There's lots
will take things as they are--fat and stupid; and lots will be
worried by a sort of feeling that it's all wrong, and that they ought
to be doing something.  Now whenever things are so that a lot of
people feel they ought to be doing something, the weak, and those who
go weak with a lot of complicated thinking, always make for a sort of
do-nothing religion, very pious and superior, and submit to
persecution and the will of the Lord.  Very likely you've seen the
same thing.  It's energy in a gale of funk, and turned clean inside
out.  These cages will be full of psalms and hymns and piety.  And
those of a less simple sort will work in a bit of--what it
is?--eroticism."

He paused.

"Very likely these Martians will make pets of some of them;
train them to do tricks--who knows?--get sentimental over the pet boy
who grew up and had to be killed.  And some, maybe, they will train
to hunt us."

"No," I cried, "that's impossible!  No human being--"

"What's the good of going on with such lies?" said the
artilleryman. "There's men who'd do it cheerful.  What nonsense to
pretend there isn't!"

And I succumbed to his conviction.

"If they come after me," he said; "Lord, if they come after me!"
and subsided into a grim meditation.

I sat contemplating these things.  I could find nothing to bring
against this man's reasoning.  In the days before the invasion no one
would have questioned my intellectual superiority to his--I, a
professed and recognised writer on philosophical themes, and he, a
common soldier; and yet he had already formulated a situation that I
had scarcely realised.

"What are you doing?" I said, presently.  "What plans have you
made?"

He hesitated.

"Well, it's like this," he said. "What have we to do?  We have
to invent a sort of life where men can live and breed, and be
sufficiently secure to bring the children up.  Yes--wait a bit, and
I'll make it clearer what I think ought to be done.  The tame ones
will go like all tame beasts; in a few generations they'll be big,
beautiful, richblooded, stupid--rubbish!  The risk is that we who
keep wild will go savage-degenerate into a sort of big, savage
rat....  You see, how I mean to live is underground I've been
thinking about the drains.  Of course those who don't know drains
think horrible things; but under this London are miles and
miles--hundred of miles--and a few days' rain and London empty will
leave them sweet and clean.  The main drains are big enough and airy
enough for anyone.  Then there's cellars, vaults, stores, from which
bolting passages may be made to the drains.  And the railway tunnels
and subways.  Eh?  You begin to see?  And we form a
band--able-bodied, clean-minded men.  We're not going to pick up any
rubbish that drifts in.  Weaklings go out again."

"As you meant me to go?"

"Well--I parleyed, didn't I?"

"We won't quarrel about that.  Go on."

"Those who stop obey orders.  Able-bodied, clean-minded women we
want also--mothers and teachers.  No lackadaisical ladies--no blasted
rolling eyes.  We can't have any weak or silly.  Life is real again,
and the useless and cumbersome and mischievous have to die.  They
ought to die.  They ought to be willing to die.  It's a sort of
disloyalty, after all, to live and taint the race.  And they can't be
happy.  Moreover, dying's none so dreadful; it's the funking makes it
bad.  And in all those places we shall gather.  Our district will be
London.  And we may even be able to keep a watch, and run about in
the open when the Martians keep away.  Play cricket, perhaps.  That's
how we shall save the race.  Eh?  It's a possible thing?  But saving
the race is nothing in itself.  As I say, that's only being rats.
It's saving our knowledge and adding to it is the thing.  There men
like you come in.  There's books, there's models.  We must make great
safe places down deep, and get all the books we can; not novels and
poetry swipes, but ideas, science hooks.  That's where men like you
come in.  We must go to the British Museum and pick all those books
through.  Especially we must keep up our science--learn more.  We
must watch these Martians.  Some of us must go as spies.  When it's
all working, perhaps I will.  Get caught, I mean.  And the great
thing is, we must leave the Martians alone.  We mustn't even steal.
If we get in their way, we clear out.  We must show them we mean no
harm.  Yes, I know.  But they're intelligent things, and they won't
hunt us down if they have all they want, and think we're just
harmless vermin."

The artilleryman paused and laid a brown hand upon my arm.

"After all, it may not be so much we may have to learn before
--Just imagine this: Four or five of their fighting-machines suddenly
starting off--Heat-Rays right and left, and not a Martian in `em.
Not a Martian in `em, but men--men who have learned the way how.  It
may be in my time, even--those men.  Fancy having one of them lovely
things, with its Heat-Ray wide and free!  Fancy having it in control!
What would it matter if you smashed to smithereens at the end of the
run, after a bust like that?  I reckon the Martians'll open their
beautiful eyes!  Can't you see them, man?  Can't you see them
hurrying, hurrying--puffing and blowing and hooting to their other
mechanical affairs?  Something out of gear in every case.  And swish,
bang, rattle, swish!  Just as they are fumbling over it, swish comes
the Heat-Ray, and, behold! man has come back to his own."

For a while the imaginative daring of the artilleryman, and the
one of assurance and courage he assumed, completely dominated my
mind.  I believed unhesitatingly both in his forecast of human
destiny and in the practicability of his astonishing scheme, and the
reader who thinks me susceptible and foolish must contrast his
position, reading steadily with all his thoughts about his subject,
and mine, crouching fearfully in the bushes and listening, distracted
by apprehension.  We talked in this manner through the early morning
time, and later crept out of the bushes, and, after scanning the sky
for Martians, hurried precipitately to the house on Putney Hill where
he had made his lair.  It was the coal cellar of the place, and when
I saw the work he had spent a week upon--it was a burrow scarcely ten
yards long, which he designed to reach to the main drain on Putney
Hill--I had my first inkling between his dreams and his powers.  Such
a hole I could have dug in a day.  But I believed in him sufficiently
to work with him all that morning until past midday at his digging.
We had a garden barrow and shot the earth we removed against the
kitchen range.  We refreshed ourselves with a tin of mock-turtle soup
and wine from the neighbouring pantry.  I found a curious relief from
the aching strangeness of the world in this steady labour.  As we
worked, I turned his project over in my mind, and presently
objections and doubts began to arise; but I worked there all the
morning, so glad was I to find myself with a purpose again.  After
working an hour I began to speculate on the distance one had to go
before the cloaca was reached, the chances we had of missing it
altogether.  My immediate trouble was why we should dig this long
tunnel, when it was possible to get into the drain at once down one
of the manholes, and work back to the house.  It seemed to me, too,
that the house was inconveniently chosen, and required a needless
length of tunnel.  And just as I was beginning to face these things,
the artilleryman stopped digging, and looked at me.

"We're working well," he said.  He put down his spade.  "Let us
knock off a bit," he said.  "I think it's time we reconnoitred from
the roof of the house."

I was for going on, and after a little hesitation he resumed his
spade; and then suddenly I was struck by a thought.  I stopped, and
so did he at once.

"Why were you walking about the common," I said, "instead of
being here?"

"Taking the air," he said "I was coming back.  It's safer by
night."

"But the work?"

"Oh, one can't always work," he said, and in a flash I saw the
man plain.  He hesitated, holding his spade.  "We ought to
reconnoitre now," he said, "because if any come near they may bear
the spades and drop upon us unawares."

I was no longer disposed to object.  We went together to the
roof and stood on a ladder peeping out of the roof door.  No Martians
were to be seen, and we ventured out on the tiles, and slipped down
under shelter of the parapet.

From this position a shrubbery hid the greater portion of
Putney, but we could see the river below, a bubbly mass of red weed,
and the low parts of Lambeth flooded and red.  The red creeper
swarmed up the trees about the old palace, and their branches
stretched gaunt and dead, and set with shrivelled leaves, from amid
its clusters.  It was strange how entirely dependent both these
things were upon flowing water for their propagation.  About us
neither had gained a footing; laburnums, pink mays, snowballs, and
trees of arborvitae:, rose out of laurels and hydrangeas, green and
brilliant into the sunlight.  Beyond Kensington dense smoke was
rising, and that and a blue haze hid the northward hills.

The artilleryman began to tell me of the sort of people who
still remained in London.

"One night last week," he said, "some fools got the electric
light in order, and there was all Regent Street and the Circus
ablaze, crowded with painted and ragged drunkards, men and women,
dancing and shouting till dawn.  A man who was there told me.  And as
the day came they became aware of a fighting-machine standing near by
the Langham and looking down at them.  Heaven knows how long he had
been there.  It must have given some of them a nasty turn.  He came
down the road towards them, and picked up nearly a hundred too drunk
or frightened to run away.

Grotesque gleam of a time no history will ever fully describe!

From that, in answer to my questions, he came round to his
grandiose plans again.  He grew enthusiastic.  He talked so
eloquently of the possibility of capturing a fighting-machine that I
more than half believed in him again.  But now that I was beginning
to understand something of his quality, I could divine the stress he
laid on doing nothing precipitately.  And I noted that now there was
no question that he personally was to capture and fight the great
machine.

After a time we went down to the cellar.  Neither of us seemed
disposed to resume digging, and when he suggested a meal, I was
nothing loath.  He became suddenly very generous, and when we had
eaten he went away and returned with some excellent cigars.  We lit
these, and his optimism glowed.  He was inclined to regard my coming
as a great occasion.

"There's some champagne in the cellar," he said.

"We can dig better on this Thames-side burgundy," said I.

"No," said he; "I am host today.  Champagne!  Great God!  We've
a heavy enough task before us!  Let us take a rest and gather
strength while we may.  Look at these blistered hands!"

And pursuant to this idea of a holiday, he insisted upon playing
cards after we had eaten.  He taught me euchre, and after dividing
London between us, I taking the northern side and he the southern, we
played for parish points.  Grotesque and foolish as this will seem to
the sober reader, it is absolutely true, and what is more remarkable,
I found the card game and several others we played extremely
interesting.

Strange mind of man! that, with our species upon the edge of
extermination or appalling degradation, with no clear prospect before
us but the chance of a horrible death, we could sit following the
chance of this painted pasteboard, and playing the "joker" with vivid
delight.  Afterwards he taught me poker, and I beat him at three
tough chess games.  When dark came we decided to take the risk, and
lit a lamp.

After an interminable string of games, we supped, and the
artilleryman finished the champagne.  We went on smoking the cigars.
He was no longer the energetic regenerator of his species I had
encountered in the morning.  He was still optimistic, but it was a
less kinetic, a more thoughtful optimism.  I remember he wound up
with my health proposed in a speech of small variety and considerable
intermittence.  I took a cigar, and went upstairs to look at the
lights of which he had spoken that blazed so greenly along the
Highgate hills.

At first I stared unintelligently across the London valley.  The
northern hills were shrouded in darkness; the fires near Kensington
glowed redly, and now and then an orange-red tongue of flame flashed
up and vanished in the deep blue night.  All the rest of London was
black.  Then, nearer, I perceived a strange light, a pale,
violet-purple fluorescent glow, quivering under the night breeze.
For a space I could not understand it, and then I knew that it must
be the red weed from which this faint irradiation proceeded.  With
that realisation my dormant sense of wonder, my sense of the
proportion of things, awoke again.  I glanced from that to Mars, red
and clear, glowing high in the west, and then gazed long and
earnestly at the darkness of Hampstead and Highgate.

I remained a very long time upon the roof, wondering at the
grotesque changes of the day.  I recalled my mental states from the
midnight prayer to the foolish card-playing.  I had a violent
revulsion of feeling.  I remember I flung away the cigar with a
certain wasteful symbolism.  My folly came to me with glaring
exaggeration.  I seemed a traitor to my wife and to my kind; I was
filled with remorse.  I resolved to leave this strange undisciplined
dreamer of great things to his drink and gluttony, and to go on into
London.  There, it seemed to me, I had the best chance of learning
what the Martians and my fellowmen were doing.  I was still upon the
roof when the late moon rose.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 8: Dead London

After I had parted from the artilleryman, I went down the hill,
and by the High Street across the bridge to Fulham.  The red weed was
tumultuous at that time, and nearly choked the bridge roadway; but
its fronds were already whitened in patches by the spreading disease
that presently removed it so swiftly.

At the corner of the lane that runs to Putney Bridge station I
found a man lying.  He was as black as a sweep with the black dust,
alive, but helplessly and speechlessly drunk.  I could get nothing
from him but curses and furious lunges at my head.  I think I should
have stayed by him but for the brutal expression of his face.

There was black dust along the roadway from the bridge onwards,
and it grew thicker in Fulham.  The streets were horribly quiet.  I
got food--sour, hard, and mouldy, but quite eatable--in a baker's
shop here.  Some way towards Walham Green the streets became clear of
powder, and I passed a white terrace of houses on fire; the noise of
the burning was an absolute relief.  Going on towards Brompton, the
streets were quiet again.

Here I came once more upon the black powder in the streets and
upon dead bodies.  I saw altogether about a dozen in the length of
the Fulham Road.  They had been dead many days, so that I hurried
quickly past them.  The black powder covered them over, and softened
their outlines.  One or two had been disturbed by dogs.

Where there was no black powder, it was curiously like a Sunday
in the City, with the closed shops, the houses locked up and the
blinds drawn, the desertion, and the stillness.  In some places
plunderers had been at work but rarely at other than the provision
and wine shops.  A jeweller's window had been broken open in one
place, but apparently the thief had been disturbed, and a number of
gold chains and a watch lay scattered on the pavement.  I did not
trouble to touch them.  Farther on was a tattered woman in a heap on
a doorstep; the hand that hung over her knee was gashed and bled down
her rusty brown dress, and a smashed magnum of champagne formed a
pool across the pavement.  She seemed asleep, but she was dead.

The farther I penetrated into London, the profounder grew the
stillness.  But it was not so much the stillness of death--it was the
stillness of suspense, of expectation.  At any time the destruction
that had already singed the north-western borders of the metropolis,
and had annihilated Ealing and Kilburn, might strike among these
houses and leave them smoking ruins.  It was a city condemned and
derelict....

In South Kensington the streets were clear of dead and of black
powder.  It was near South Kensington that I first heard the howling.
It crept almost imperceptibly upon my senses.  It was a sobbing
alternation of two notes, "Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla," keeping on
perpetually.  When I passed streets that ran northward it grew in
volume, and houses and buildings seemed to deaden and cut it off
again.  It came in a full tide down Exhibition Road.  I stopped,
staring towards Kensington Gardens, wondering at this strange, remote
wailing.  It was as if that mighty desert of houses had found a voice
for its fear and solitude.

"Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla," wailed that superhuman note great
waves of sound sweeping down the broad, sunlit roadway, between the
tall buildings on each side.  I turned northwards, marvelling,
towards the iron gates of Hyde Park.  I had half a mind to break into
the Natural History Museum and find my way up to the summits of the
towers, in order to see across the park.  But I decided to keep to
the ground, where quick hiding was possible, and so went on up the
Exhibition Road.  All the large mansions on each side of the road
were empty and still, and my footsteps echoed against the sides of
the houses.  At the top, near the park gate, I came upon a strange
sight--a bus overturned, and the skeleton of a horse picked clean.  I
puzzled over this for a time, and then went on to the bridge over the
Serpentine.  The voice grew stronger and stronger, though I could see
nothing above the housetops on the north side of the park, save a
haze of smoke to the northwest.

"Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla," cried the voice, coming, as it seemed
to me, from the district about Regent's Park.  The desolating cry
worked upon my mind.  The mood that had sustained me passed.  The
wailing took possession of me.  I found I was intensely weary,
footsore, and now again hungry and thirsty.

It was already past noon.  Who was I wandering alone in this
city of the dead?  Why was I alone when all London was lying in
state, and in its black shroud?  I felt intolerably lonely.  My mind
ran on old friends that I had forgotten for years.  I thought of the
poisons in the chemists' shops, of the liquors the wine merchants
stored; I recalled the two sodden creatures of despair, who so far as
I knew, shared the city with myself....

I came into Oxford Street by the Marble Arch, and here again
were black powder and several bodies, and an evil, ominous smell from
the gratings of the cellars of some of the houses.  I grew very
thirsty after the heat of my long walk.  With infinite trouble I
managed to break into a public-house and get food and drink.  I was
weary after eating, and went into the parlour behind the bar, and
slept on a black horsehair sofa I found there.

I awoke to find that dismal howling still in my ears, "Ulla,
ulla, ulla, ulla."  It was now dusk, and after I had routed out some
biscuits and a cheese in the bar--there was a meat safe, but it
contained nothing but maggots--I wandered on through the silent
residential squares to Baker Street--Portman Square is the only one I
can name--and so came out at last upon Regent's Park.  And as I
emerged from the top of Baker Street, I saw far away over the trees
in the clearness of the sunset the hood of the Martian giant from
which this howling proceeded.  I was not terrified.  I came upon him
as if it were a matter of course.  I watched him for some time, but
he did not move.  He appeared to be standing and yelling, for no
reason that I could discover.

I tried to formulate a plan of action.  That perpetual sound of
"Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla," confused my mind.  Perhaps I was too tired
to be very fearful.  Certainly I was more curious to know the reason
of this monotonous crying than afraid.  I turned back away from the
park and struck into Park Road, intending to skirt the park, went
along under the shelter of the terraces, and got a view of this
stationary, howling Martian from the direction of St.  John's Wood.
A couple of hundred yards out of Baker Street I heard a yelping
chorus, and saw, first a dog with a piece of putrescent red meat in
his jaws coming headlong towards me, and then a pack of starving
mongrels in pursuit of him.  He made a wide curve to avoid me, as
though he feared I might prove a fresh competitor.  As the yelping
died away down the silent road, the wailing sound of "Ulla, ulla,
ulla, ulla," reasserted itself.

I came upon the wrecked handling-machine halfway to St.John's
Wood station.  At first I thought a house had fallen across the road.
It was only as I clambered among the ruins that I saw, with a start,
this mechanical Samson lying, with its tentacles bent and smashed and
twisted, among the ruins it had made.  The forepart was shattered.
It seemed as if it had driven blindly straight at the house, and had
been overwhelmed in its overthrow.  It seemed to me then that this
might have happened by a handling-machine escaping from the guidance
of its Martian.  I could not clamber among the ruins to see it, and
the twilight was now so far advanced that the blood with which its
seat was smeared, and the gnawed gristle of the Martian that the dogs
had left, were invisible to me.

Wondering still more at all that I had seen, I pushed on towards
Primrose Hill.  Far away, through a gap in the trees, I saw a second
Martian, as motionless as the first, standing in the park towards the
Zoological Gardens, and silent.  A little beyond the ruins about the
smashed handling-machine I came upon the red weed again, and found
the Regent's Canal, a spongy mass of dark-red vegetation.

As I crossed the bridge, the sound of "Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,"
ceased.  It was, as it were, cut off.  The silence came like a
thunderclap.

The dusky houses about me stood faint and tall and dim; the
trees towards the park were growing black.  All about me the red weed
clambered among the runs, writhing to get above me in the dimness.
Night, the mother of fear and mystery, was coming upon me.  But while
that voice sounded the solitude, the desolation had been endurable;
by virtue of it London had still seemed alive, and the sense of life
about me had upheld me.  Then suddenly a change, the passing of
something--I knew not what--and then a stillness that could be felt.
Nothing but this gaunt quiet.

London about me gazed at me spectrally.  The windows in the
white houses were like the eye sockets of skulls.  About me my
imagination found a thousand noiseless enemies moving.  Terror seized
me, a horror of my temerity.  In front of me the road became pitchy
black as though it was tarred, and I saw a contorted shape lying
across the pathway.  I could not bring myself to go on.  I turned
down St. John's Wood Road, and ran headlong from this unendurable
stillness towards Kilburn.  I hid from the night and the silence,
until long after midnight, in a cabmen's shelter in Harrow Road.  But
before the dawn my courage returned, and while the stars were still
in the sky I turned once more towards Regent's Park.  I missed my way
among the streets, and presently saw down a long avenue, in the
half-light of the early dawn, the curve of Primrose Hill.  On the
summit, towering up to the fading stars, was a third Martian, erect
and motionless like the other.

An insane resolve posed me.  I would die and end it.  And I
would save myself even the trouble of killing myself.  I marched on
recklessly towards this Titan, and then, as I drew nearer and the
light grew, I saw that a multitude of black birds was circling and
clustering about the hood.  At that my heart gave a bound, and I
began running along the road.

I hurried through the red weed that choked St. Edmund's Terrace
(I waded breast-high across a torrent of water that was rushing down
from the waterworks towards the Albert Road), and emerged upon the
grass before the rising of the sun.  Great mounds had been heaped
about the crest of the hill, making a huge redoubt of it--it was the
final and largest place the Martians had made --and from behind these
heaps there rose a thin smoke against the sky.  Against the sky line
an eager dog ran and disappeared.  The thought that had flashed into
my mind grew real, grew credible.  I felt no fear, only a wild,
trembling exultation, as I ran up the hill towards the motionless
monster.  Out of the hood hung lank shreds of brown, at which the
hungry birds pecked and tore.

In another moment I had scrambled up the earthen rampart and
stood upon its crest, and the interior of the redoubt was below me.
A mighty space it was, with gigantic machines here and there within
it, huge mounds of material and strange shelter places.  And
scattered about it, some in their overturned war-machines, some in
the now rigid handling-machines, and a dozen of them stark and silent
and laid in a row, were the Martians--dead!,--slain by the
putrefactive and disease bacteria against which their systems were
unprepared; slain as the red weed was being slain; slain, after all
man's devices had failed, by the humblest things that God, in his
wisdom, has put upon this earth.

For so it had come about, as indeed I and many men might have
foreseen had not terror and disaster blinded our minds.  These germs
of disease have taken toll of humanity since the beginning of
things--taken toll of our prehuman ancestors since life began here.
But by virtue of this natural selection of our kind we have developed
resisting power; to no germs do we succumb without a struggle, and to
many--those that cause putrefaction in dead matter, for instance--our
living frames are altogether immune.  But there are no bacteria in
Mars, and directly these invaders arrived, directly they drank and
fed, our microscopic allies began to work their overthrow.  Already
when I watched them they were irrevocably doomed, dying and rotting
even as they went to and fro.  It was inevitable.  By the toll of a
billion deaths man has bought his birthright of the earth, and it is
his against all comers; it would still be his were the Martians ten
times as mighty as they are.  For neither do men live nor die in
vain.

Here and there they were scattered, nearly fifty altogether, in
that great gulf they had made, overtaken by a death that must have
seemed to them as incomprehensible as any death could be.  To me also
at that time this death was incomprehensible.  All I knew was that
these things that had been alive and so terrible to men were dead.
For a moment I believed that the destruction of Sennacherib had been
repeated, that God had repented, that the Angel of Death had slain
them in the night.

I stood staring into the pit, and my heart lightened gloriously,
even as the rising sun struck the world to fire about me with his
rays.  The pit was still in darkness; the mighty engines, so great
and wonderful in their power and complexity, so unearthly in their
tortuous forms, rose weird and vague and strange out of the shadows
towards the light.  A multitude of dogs, I could hear, fought over
the bodies that lay darkly in the depth of the pit, far below me.
Across the pit on its farther lip, flat and vast and strange, lay the
great flying-machine with which they had been experimenting upon our
denser atmosphere when decay and death arrested them.  Death had come
not a day too soon.  At the sound of a cawing overhead I looked up at
the huge fighting-machine that would fight no more for ever, at the
tattered red shreds of flesh that dripped down upon the overturned
seats on the summit of Primrose Hill.

I turned and looked down the slope of the hill to where,
enhaloed now in birds, stood those other two Martians that I had seen
overnight, just as death had overtaken them.  The one had died, even
as it had been crying to its companions; perhaps it was the last to
die, and its voice had gone on perpetually until the force of its
machinery was exhausted.  They glittered now, harmless tripod towers
of shining metal, in the brightness of the rising sun.

All about the pit, and saved as by a miracle from everlasting
destruction, stretched the great Mother of Cities.  Those who have
only seen London veiled in her sombre robes of smoke can scarcely
imagine the naked clearness and beauty of the silent wilderness of
houses.

Eastward, over the blackened ruins of the Albert Terrace and the
splintered spire of the church, the sun blazed dazzling in a clear
sky, and here and there some facet in the great wilderness of roofs
caught the light and glared with a white intensity.

Northward were Kilburn and Hampstead, blue and crowded with
houses; westward the great city was dimmed; and southward, beyond the
Martians, the green waves of Regent's Park, the Langham Hotel, the
dome of the Albert Hall, the Imperial Institute, and the giant
mansions of the Brompton Road came out clear and little in the
sunrise, the jagged ruins of Westminster rising hazily beyond.  Far
away and blue were the Surrey hills, and the towers of the Crystal
Palace glittered like two silver rods.  The dome of St.  Paul's was
dark against the sunrise, and injured, I saw for the first time, by a
huge gaping cavity on its western side.

And as I looked at this wide expanse of houses and factories and
churches, silent and abandoned; as I thought of the multitudinous
hopes and efforts, the innumerable hosts of lives that had gone to
build this human reef, and of the swift and ruthless destruction that
had hung over it all; when I realised that the shadow had been rolled
back, and that men might still live in the streets, and this dear
vast dead city of mine be once more alive and powerful, I felt a wave
of emotion that was near akin to tears.

The torment was over.  Even that day the healing would begin.
The survivors of the people scattered over the country-- leaderless,
lawless, foodless, like sheep without a shepherd--the thousands who
had fled by sea, would begin to return; the pulse of life, growing
stronger and stronger, would beat again in the empty streets and pour
across the vacant squares.  Whatever destruction was done, the hand
of the destroyer was stayed.  All the gaunt wrecks, the blackened
skeletons of houses that stared so dismally at the sunlit grass of
the hill, would presently be echoing with the hammers of the
restorers and ringing with the tapping of their troweIs.  At the
thought I extended my hands towards the sky and began thanking God.
In a year, thought I--in a year ...

With overwhelming force came the thought of myself, of my wife,
and the old life of hope and tender helpfulness that had ceased for
ever.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 9: Wreckage

And now comes the strangest thing in my story.  Yet, perhaps, it
is not altogether strange.  I remember, clearly and coldly and
vividly, all that I did that day until the time that I stood weeping
and praising God upon the summit of Primrose Hill.  And then I
forget.

Of the next three days I know nothing.  I have learned since
that, so far from my being the first discoverer of the Martian
overthrow, several such wanderers as myself had already discovered
this on the previous night.  One man--the first--had gone to St.
Martin's-le-Grand, and, while I sheltered in the cabmen's hut, had
contrived to telegraph to Paris.  Thence the joyful news had flashed
all over the world; a thousand cities, chilled by ghastly
aprehensions, suddenly flashed into frantic illuminations; they knew
of it in Dublin, Edinburgh, Manchester, Birmingham, at the time when
I stood upon the verge of the pit.  Already men, weeping with joy, as
I have heard, shouting and staying their work to shake hands and
shout, were making up trains, even as near as Crewe, to descend upon
London.  The church bells that had ceased a fortnight since suddenly
caught the news, until all England was bell-ringing.  Men on cycles,
lean-faced, unkempt, scorched along every country lane shouting of
unhoped deliverance, shouting to gaunt, staring figures of despair.
And for the food!  Across the Channel, across the Irish Sea, across
the Atlantic, corn, bread, and meat were tearing to our relief.  All
the shipping in the world seemed going Londonward in those days.  But
of all this I have no memory.  I drifted--a demented man.  I found
myself in a house of kindly people, who had found me on the third day
wandering, weeping, and raving through the streets of St. John's
Wood.  They have told me since that I was singing some inane doggerel
about "The Last Man Left Alive!  Hurrah!  The Last Man Left Alive!"
Troubled as they were with their own affairs, these people, whose
name, much as I would like to express my gratitude to them, I may not
even give here, nevertheless cumbered themselves with me, sheltered
me, and protected me from myself.  Apparently they had learned
something of my story from me during the days of my lapse.

Very gently, when my mind was assured again, did they break to
me what they had learned of the fate of Leatherhead.  Two days after
I was imprisoned it had been destroyed, with every soul in it, by a
Martian.  He had swept it out of existence, as it seemed, without any
provocation, as a boy might crush an ant hill, in the mere wantonness
of power.

I was a lonely man, and they were very kind to me.  I was a
lonely man and a sad one, and they bore with me.  I remained with
them four days after my recovery.  All that time I felt a vague, a
growing craving to look once more on whatever remained of the little
life that seemed so happy and bright in my past.  It was a mere
hopeless desire to feast upon my misery.  They dissuaded me.  They
did all they could to divert me from this morbidity.  But at last I
could resist the impulse no longer, and, promising faithfully to
return to them, and parting, as I will confess, from these four-day
friends with tears, I went out again into the streets that had lately
been so dark and strange and empty.

Already they were busy with returning people; in places even
there were shops open, and I saw a drinking fountain running water.

I remember how mockingly bright the day seemed as I went back on
my melancholy pilgrimage to the little house at Woking, how busy the
streets and vivid the moving life about me.  So many people were
abroad everywhere, busied in a thousand activities, that it seemed
incredible that any great proportion of the population could have
been slain.  But then I noticed how yellow were the skins of the
people I met, how shaggy the hair of the men, how large and bright
their eyes, and that every other man still wore his dirty rags.
Their faces seemed all with one of two expressions--a leaping
exultation and energy or a grim resolution.  Save for the expression
of the faces, London seemed a city of tramps.  The vestries were
indiscriminately distributing bread sent us by the French government.
The ribs of the few horses showed dismally.  Haggard special
constables with white badges stood at the corners of every street.  I
saw little of the mischief wrought by the Martians until I reached
Wellington Street, and there I saw the red weed clambering over the
buttresses of Waterloo Bridge.

At the corner of the bridge, too, I saw one of the common
contrasts of that grotesque time--a sheet of paper flaunting against
a thicket of the red weed, transfixed by a stick that kept it in
place.  It was the placard of the first newspaper to resume
publication--the Daily Mail.  I bought a copy for a blackened
shilling I found in my pocket.  Most of it was in blank, but the
solitary compositor who did the thing had amused himself by making a
grotesque scheme of advertisement stereo on the back page.  The
matter he printed was emotional; the news organisation had not as yet
found its way back.  I learned nothing fresh except that already in
one week the examination of the Martian mechanisms had yielded
astonishing results.  Among other things, the article assured me what
I did not believe at the time, that the "Secret of Flying" was
discovered.  At Waterloo I found the free trains that were taking
people to their homes.  The first rush was already over.  There were
few people in the train, and I was in no mood for casual
conversation.  I got a compartment to myself, and sat with folded
arms, looking greyly at the sunlit devastation that flowed past the
windows.  And just outside the terminus the train jolted over
temporary rails, and on either side of the railway the houses were
blackened ruins.  To Clapham Junction the face of London was grimy
with powder of the Black Smoke, in spite of two days of thunderstorms
and rain, and at Clapham Junction the line had been wrecked again;
there were hundreds of out-of-work clerks and shopmen working side by
side with the customary navvies, and we were jolted over a hasty
relaying.

All down the line from there the aspect of the country was gaunt
and unfamiliar; Wimbledon particularly had suffered.  Walton, by
virtue of its unburned pine woods, seemed the least hurt of any place
along the line.  The Wandle, the Mole, every little stream, was a
heaped mass of red weed, in appearance between butcher's meat and
pickled cabbage.  The Surrey pine woods were too dry, however, for
the festoons of the red climber.  Beyond Wimbledon, within sight of
the line, in certain nursery grounds, were the heaped masses of earth
about the sixth cylinder.  A number of people were standing about it,
and some sappers were busy in the midst of it.  Over it flaunted a
Union Jack, flapping cheerfully in the morning breeze.  The nursery
grounds were everywhere crimson with the weed, a wide expanse of
livid colour cut with purple shadows, and very painful to the eye.
One's gaze went with infinite relief from the scorched greys and
sullen reds of the foreground to the blue-green softness of the
eastward hills.

The line on the London side of Woking station was still
undergoing repair, so I descended at Byfleet station and took the
road to Maybury, past the place where I and the artilleryman had
talked to the hussars, and on by the spot where the Martian had
appeared to me in the thunderstorm.  Here, moved by curiosity, I
turned aside to find, among a tangle of red fronds, the warped and
broken dog cart with the whitened bones of the horse scattered and
gnawed.  For a time I stood regarding these vestiges....

Then I returned through the pine wood, neck-high with red weed
here and there, to find the landlord of the Spotted Dog had already
found burial, and so came home past the College Arms.  A man standing
at an open cottage door greeted me by name as I passed.

I looked at my house with a quick flash of hope that faded
immediately.  The door had been forced; it was unfast and was opening
slowly as I approached.

It slammed again.  The curtains of my study fluttered out of the
open window from which I and the artilleryman had watched the dawn.
No one had closed it since.  The smashed bushes were just as I had
left them nearly four weeks ago.  I stumbled into the hall, and the
house felt empty.  The stair carpet was ruffled and discoloured where
I had crouched, soaked to the skin from the thunderstorm the night of
the catastrophe.  Our muddy footsteps I saw still went up the stairs.

I followed them to my study, and found lying on my writing-table
still, with the selenite paper weight upon it, the sheet of work I
had left on the afternoon of the opening of the cylinder.  For a
space I stood reading over my abandoned arguments.  It was a paper on
the probable development of Moral Ideas with the development of the
civilising process; and the last sentence was the opening of a
prophecy: "In about two hundred years," I had written, "we may
expect--" The sentence ended abruptly.  I remembered my inability to
fix my mind that morning, scarcely a month gone by, and how I had
broken off to get my Daily Chronicle from the newsboy.  I remembered
how I went down to the garden gate as he came along, and how I had
listened to his odd story of "Men from Mars."

I came down and went into the dining room.  There were the
mutton and the bread, both far gone now in decay, and a beer bottle
overturned, just as I and the artilleryman had left them.  My home
was desolate.  I perceived the folly of the faint hope I had
cherished so long.  And then a strange thing occurred.  "It is no
use," said a voice.  "The house is deserted.  No one has been here
these ten days.  Do not stay here to torment yourself.  No one
escaped but you.

I was startled.  Had I spoken my thought aloud?  I turned, and
the French window was open behind me.  I made a step to it, and stood
looking out.

And there, amazed and afraid, even as I stood amazed and afraid,
were my cousin and my wife--my wife white and tearless.  She gave a
faint cry.

"I came," she said. "I knew--knew--- "

She put her hand to her throat--swayed.  I made a step forward,
and caught her in my arms.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS -- Book 2

Chapter 10: The Epilogue

I cannot but regret, now that I am concluding my story, how
little I am able to contribute to the discussion of the many
debatable questions which are still unsettled.  In one respect I
shall certainly provoke criticism.  My particular province is
speculative philosophy.  My knowledge of comparative physiology is
confined to a book or two, but it seems to me that Carver's
suggestions as to the reason of the rapid death of the Martians is so
probable as to be regarded almost as a proven conclusion.  I have
assumed that in the body of my narrative.

At any rate, in all the bodies of the Martians that were
examined after the war, no bacteria except those already known as
terrestrial species were found.  That they did not bury any of their
dead, and the reckless slaughter they perpetrated, point also to an
entire ignorance of the putrefactive process.  But probable as this
seems, it is by no means a proven conclusion.

Neither is the composition of the Black Smoke known, which the
Martians used with such deadly effect, and the generator of the
Heat-Rays remains a puzzle.  The terrible disasters at the Ealing and
South Kensington laboratories have disinclined analysts for further
investigations upon the latter.  Spectrum analysis of the black
powder points unmistakably to the presence of an unknown element with
a brilliant group of three lines in the green, and it is possible
that it combines with argon to form a compound which acts at once
with deadly effect upon some constituent in the blood.  But such
unproven speculations will scarcely be of interest to the general
reader, to whom this story is addressed.  None of the brown scum that
drifted down the Thames after the destruction of Shepperton was
examined at the time, and now none is forthcoming.

The results of an anatomical examination of the Martians, so far
as the prowling dogs had left such an examination possible, I have
already given.  But everyone is familiar with the magnificent and
almost complete specimen in spirits at the Natural History Museum,
and the countless drawings that have been made from it; and beyond
that the interest of their physiology and structure is purely
scientific.

A question of graver and universal interest is the possibility
of another attack from the Martians.  I do not think that nearly
enough attention is being given to this aspect of the matter.  At
present the planet Mars is in conjunction, but with every return to
opposition I, for one, anticipate a renewal of their adventure.  In
any case, we should be prepared.  It seems to me that it should be
possible to define the position of the gun from which the shots are
discharged, to keep a sustained watch upon this part of the planet,
and to anticipate the arrival of the next attack.

In that case the cylinder might be destroyed with dynamite or
artillery before it was sufficiently cool for the Martians to emerge,
or they might be butchered by means of guns so soon as the screw
opened.  It seems to me that they have lost a vast advantage in the
failure of their first surprise.  Possibly they see it in the same
light.

Lessing has advanced excellent reasons for supposing that the
Martians have actually succeeded in effecting a landing on the planet
Venus.  Seven months ago now, Venus and Mars were in alignment with
the sun; that is to say, Mars was in opposition from the point of
view of an observer on Venus.  Subsequently a peculiar luminous and
sinuous marking appeared on the unillumined half of the inner planet,
and almost simultaneously a faint dark mark of a similar sinuous
character was detected upon a photograph of the Martian disk.  One
needs to see the drawings of these appearances in order to appreciate
fully their remarkable resemblance in character.

At any rate, whether we expect another invasion or not, our
views of the human future must be greatly modified by these events.
We have learned now that we cannot regard this planet as being fenced
in and a secure abiding place for Man; we can never anticipate the
unseen good or evil that may come upon us suddenly out of space.  It
may be that in the larger design of the universe this invasion from
Mars is not without its ultimate benefit for men; it has robbed us of
that serene confidence in the future which is the most fruitful
source of decadence, the gifts to human science it has brought are
enormous, and it has done much to promote the conception of the
commonweal of mankind.  It may be that across the immensity of space
the Martians have watched the fate of these pioneers of theirs and
learned their lesson, and that on the planet Venus they have found a
securer settlement.  Be that as it may, for many years yet there will
certainly be no relaxation of the eager scrutiny of the Martian disk,
and those fiery darts of the sky, the shooting stars, will bring with
them as they fall an unavoidable apprehension to all the sons of men.

The broadening of men's views that has resulted can scarcely be
exaggerated.  Before the cylinder fell there was a general persuasion
that through all the deep of space no life existed beyond the petty
surface, of our minute sphere.  Now we see further.  If the Martians
can reach Venus, there is no reason to suppose that the thing is
impossible for men, and when the slow cooling of the sun makes this
earth uninhabitable, as at last it must do, it may be that the thread
of life that has begun here will have streamed out and caught our
sister planet within its toils.

Dim and wonderful is the vision I have conjured up in my mind of
life spreading slowly from this little seed bed of the solar system
throughout the inanimate vastness of sidereal space.  But that is a
remote dream.  It may be, on the other hand, that the destruction of
the Martians is only a reprieve.  To them, and not to us, perhaps is
the future ordained.

I must confess the stress and danger of the time have left an
abiding sense of doubt and insecurity in my mind.  I sit in my study
writing by lamplight, and suddenly I see again the healing valley
below set with writhing flames, and feel the house behind and about
me empty and desolate.  I go out into the Byfleet Road, and vehicles
pass me, a butcher boy in a cart, a cabful of visitors, a workman on
a bicycle, children going to school, and suddenly they become vague
and unreal, and I hurry again with the artilleryman through the hot,
brooding silence.  Of a night I see the black powder darkening the
silent streets, and the contorted bodies shrouded in that layer; they
rise upon me tattered and dog-bitten.  They gibber and grow fiercer,
paler, uglier, mad distortions of humanity at last, and I wake, cold
and wretched, in the darkness of the night.

I go to London and see the busy multitudes in Fleet Street and
the Strand, and it comes across my mind that they are but the ghosts
of the past, haunting the streets that I have seen silent and
wretched, going to and fro, phantasms in a dead city, the mockery of
life in a galvanised body.  And strange, too, it is to stand on
Primrose Hill, as I did but a day before writing this last chapter,
to see the great province of houses, dim and blue through the haze of
the smoke and mist, vanishing at last into the vague lower sky, to
see the people walking to and fro among the flower beds on the hill,
to see the sightseers about the Martian machine that stands there
still, to hear the tumult of playing children, and to recall the time
when I saw it all bright and clear-cut, hard and silent, under the
dawn of that last great day. ...

And strangest of all is it to hold my wife's hand again, and to
think that I have counted her, and that she has counted me, among the
dead.

--THE END --
1818

FRANKENSTEIN

OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS

by Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley
PREFACE

PREFACE

THE event on which this fiction is founded has been supposed, by
Dr. Darwin, and some of the physiological writers of Germany, as not
of impossible occurrence. I shall not be supposed as according the
remotest degree of serious faith to such an imagination; yet, in
assuming it as the basis of a work of fancy, I have not considered
myself as merely weaving a series of supernatural terrors. The event
on which the interest of the story depends is exempt from the
disadvantages of a mere tale of spectres or enchantment. It was
recommended by the novelty of the situations which it develops; and,
however impossible as a physical fact, affords a point of view to
the imagination for the delineating of human passions more
comprehensive and commanding than any which the ordinary relations
of existing events can yield.

I have thus endeavoured to preserve the truth of the elementary
principles of human nature, while I have not scrupled to innovate upon
their combinations. The Iliad, the tragic poetry of Greece-
Shakespeare, in the Tempest/and Midsummer Night's Dream- and most
especially Milton, in Paradise Lost, conform to this rule; and the
most humble novelist, who seeks to confer or receive amusement from
his labours, may, without presumption, apply to prose fiction a
licence, or rather a rule, from the adoption of which so many
exquisite combinations of human feeling have resulted in the highest
specimens of poetry.

The circumstance on which my story rests was suggested in casual
conversation. It was commenced partly as a source of amusement, and
partly as an expedient for exercising any untried resources of mind.
Other motives were mingled with these as the work proceeded. I am by
no means indifferent to the manner in which whatever moral
tendencies exist in the sentiments or characters it contains shall
affect the reader; yet my chief concern in this respect has been
limited to avoiding the enervating effects of the novels of the
present day and to the exhibition of the amiableness of domestic
affection, and the excellence of universal virtue. The opinions
which naturally spring from the and situation of the hero are by no
means to be conceived as existing always in my own conviction; nor
is any inference justly to be drawn from the following pages as
prejudicing any philosophical doctrine of whatever kind.

It is a subject also of additional interest to the author that
this story was begun in the majestic region where the scene is
principally laid, and in society which cannot cease to be regretted. I
passed the summer of 1816 in the environs of Geneva. The season was
cold and rainy, and in the evenings we crowded around a blazing wood
fire, and occasionally amused ourselves with some German stories of
ghosts, which happened to fall into our hands. These tales excited
in us a playful desire of imitation. Two other friends (a tale from
the pen of one of whom would be far more acceptable to the public than
anything I can ever hope to produce) and myself agreed to write each a
story founded on some supernatural occurrence.

The weather, however, suddenly became serene; and my two friends
left me on a journey among the Alps, and lost, in the magnificent
scenes which they present, all memory of their ghostly visions. The
following tale is the only one which has been completed.

Marlow, September, 1817.

LETTER I

To Mrs. Saville, England.

YOU will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the
commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
forebodings. I arrived here yesterday; and my first task is to
assure my dear sister of my welfare, and increasing confidence in
the success of my undertaking.

I am already far north of London; and as I walk in the streets
of Petersburgh, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks,
which braces my nerves, and fills me with delight. Do you understand
this feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions
towards which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy
climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my day dreams become
more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is
the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my
imagination as the region of beauty and delight. There, Margaret,
the sun is for ever visible its broad disc just skirting the
horizon, and diffusing a perpetual splendour. There- for with your
leave, my sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators- there
snow and frost are banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we play
be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region
hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. Its productions and
features may be without example, as the phenomena of the heavenly
bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes. What may not
be expected in a country of eternal light? I may there discover the
wondrous power which attracts the needle; and may regulate a
thousand celestial observations, that require only this voyage to
render their seeming eccentricities consistent forever. I shall
satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world
never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by
the foot of man. These are my enticements, and they are sufficient
to conquer all fear of danger or death, and to induce me to commence
this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in
a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery
up his native river. But, supposing all these conjectures to be false,
you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all
mankind to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole
to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are
requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at
all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.

These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I
began my letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which
elevates me to heaven; for nothing contributes so much to tranquillise
the mind as a steady purpose- a point on which the soul may fix its
intellectual eye. This expedition has been the favourite dream of my
early years. I have read with ardour the accounts of the various
voyages which have been made in the prospect of arriving at the
North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the pole. You
may remember that a history of all the voyages made for purposes of
discovery composed the whole of our good uncle Thomas's library. My
education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading. These
volumes were my study day and night, and my familiarity with them
increased that regret which I had felt, as a child, on learning that
my father's dying injunction had forbidden my uncle to allow me to
embark in a seafaring life.

These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those
poets whose effusions entranced my soul, and lifted it to heaven. I
also became a poet, and for one year lived in a Paradise of my own
creation; I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple
where the names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated. You are well
acquainted with my failure, and how heavily I bore the disappointment.
But just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my
thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.

Six years have passed since I resolved on my present
undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated
myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to
hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to
the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of
sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day,
and devoted my nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of
medicine, and those branches of physical science from which a naval
adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage. Twice I
actually hired myself as an under-mate in a Greenland whaler, and
acquitted myself to admiration. I must own I felt a little proud
when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel, and
entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness; so valuable
did he consider my services.

And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some
great purpose? My life might have been passed in ease and luxury;
but I preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my
path. Oh, that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative!
My courage and my resolution are firm; but my hopes fluctuate and my
spirits are often depressed. I am about to proceed on a long and
difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my
fortitude: I am required not only to raise the spirits of others,
but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.

This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia.
They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is
pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an
English stage-coach. The cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped
in furs- a dress which I have already adopted; for there is a great
difference between walking the deck and remaining seated motionless
for hours, when no exercise prevents the blood from actually
freezing in your veins. I have no ambition to lose my life on the
post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel.

I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three
weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be
done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many
sailors as I think necessary among those who are accustomed to the
whale-fishing. I do not intend to sail until the month of June and
when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this
question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass
before you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon, or
never.

Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower down
blessings on you, and save me, that I may again and again testify my
gratitude for all your love and kindness.- Your affectionate brother,

              R. Walton.

LETTER II

HOW slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am by frost
and snow! yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. I have
hired a vessel, and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I
have already engaged appear to be men on whom I can depend, and are
certainly possessed of dauntless courage.

But I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy;
and the absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe
evil. I have no friend, Margaret: when I am glowing with the
enthusiasm of success, there will be none to participate my joy; if
I am assailed by disappointment, no one will endeavour to sustain me
in dejection. I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but
that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the
company of a man who could sympathise with me; whose eyes would
reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I
bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentle
yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious
mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans.
How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother! I am
too ardent in execution, and too impatient of difficulties. But it
is a still greater evil to me that I am self-educated: for the first
fourteen years of my life I ran wild on a common, and read nothing but
our uncle Thomas's books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted
with the celebrated poets of our own country; but it was only when
it had ceased to be in my power to derive its most important
benefits from such a conviction that I perceived the necessity of
becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native
country. Now I am twenty-eight, and am in reality more illiterate than
many schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I have thought more, and
that my day dreams are more extended and magnificent; but they want
(as the painters call it) keeping; and I greatly need a friend who
would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection
enough for me to endeavour to regulate my mind.

Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no
friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among
merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of
human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, for
instance, is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly
desirous of glory: or rather, to word my phrase more
characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an
Englishman, and in the midst of national and professional
prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest
endowments of humanity. I first became acquainted with him on board
a whale vessel: finding that he was unemployed in this city, I
easily engaged him to assist in my enterprise.

The master is a person of an excellent disposition, and is
remarkable in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his
discipline. This circumstance, added to his well known integrity and
dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed
in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine
fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot
overcome an intense distaste to the usual brutality exercised on board
ship: have never believed it to be necessary; and when I heard of a
mariner equally noted for his kindliness of heart, and the respect and
obedience paid to him by his crew, I felt myself peculiarly
fortunate in being able to secure his services. I heard of him first
in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the happiness
of her life. This, briefly, is his story. Some years ago he loved a
young Russian lady of moderate fortune; and having amassed a
considerable sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to
the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony;
but she was bathed in tears, and, throwing herself at his feet,
entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same time that she loved
another, but that he was poor, and that her father would never consent
to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being
informed of the name of her lover, instantly abandoned his pursuit. He
had already bought a farm with his money, on which he had designed
to pass the remainder of his life; but he bestowed the whole on his
rival, together with the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock,
and then himself solicited the young woman's father to consent to
her marriage with her lover. But the old man decidedly refused,
thinking himself bound in honour to my friend; who, when he found
the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he
heard that his former mistress was married according to her
inclinations. "What a noble fellow!" you will exclaim. He is so; but
then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of
ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct
the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which
otherwise he would command.

Yet do not suppose, because I complain a little, or because I
can conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never know that
I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate; and my
voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my
embarkation. The winter has been dreadfully severe; but the spring
promises well, and it is considered as a remarkably early season; so
that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I shall do nothing
rashly: you know me sufficiently to confide in my prudence and
considerateness whenever the safety of others is committed to my care.

I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of
undertaking. It is impossible to communicate to you a conception of
the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which
I am preparing to depart. I am going to unexplored regions, to "the
land of mist and snow"; but I shall kill no albatross, therefore do
not be alarmed for my safety, or if I should come back to you as
worn and woeful as the "Ancient Mariner." You will smile at my
allusion but I will disclose a secret. I have often attributed my
attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries
of ocean, to that production of the most imaginative of modern
poets. There is something at work in my soul which I do not
understand. I am practically industrious- painstaking;- a workman to
execute with perseverance and labour:- but besides this, there is a
love for the marvellous, a belief in the marvellous, intertwined in
all my projects, which hurries me out of the common pathways of men,
even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to explore.

But to return to dearer considerations. Shall I meet you again,
after having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern
cape of Africa or America? I dare not expect such success, yet I
cannot bear to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the
present to write to me by every opportunity; I may receive your
letters on some occasions when I need them most to support my spirits.
I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never
hear from me again.- Your affectionate brother,

        Robert Walton.

LETTER III

MY DEAR Sister,- I write a few lines in haste, to say that I am
safe, and well advanced on my voyage. This letter will reach England
by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from Archangel; more
fortunate than I, who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many
years. I am, however, in good spirits: my men are bold, and apparently
firm of purpose; nor do the floating sheets of ice that continually
pass us, indicating the dangers of the region towards which we are
advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already reached a very
high latitude; but it is the height of summer, and although not so
warm as in England, the southern gales, which blow us speedily towards
those shores which I so ardently desire to attain, breathe a degree of
renovating warmth which I had not expected.

No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in
a letter. One or two stiff gales, and the springing of a leak, are
accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record;
and I shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our
voyage.

Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured that for my own sake, as
well as yours, I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be cool,
persevering, and prudent.

But success shall crown my endeavours. Wherefore not? Thus far I
have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas: the very stars
themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. Why not
still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the
determined heart and resolved will of man?

My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. But I
must finish. Heaven bless my beloved sister!

                  R.W.

LETTER IV

SO STRANGE an accident has happened to us that I cannot forbear
recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before
these papers can come into your possession.

Last Monday (July 31st), we were nearly surrounded by ice, which
closed in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room
in which she floated. Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially
as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to,
hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and
weather.

About two o'clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld,
stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice,
which seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own
mind began to grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange
sight suddenly attracted our attention, and diverted our solicitude
from our own situation. We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge
and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of
half a mile: a being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of
gigantic stature, sat in the sledge, and guided the dogs. We watched
the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes, until he
was lost among the distant inequalities of the ice.

This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we
believed, many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed
to denote that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had
supposed. Shut in, however, by ice, it was impossible to follow his
track, which we had observed with the greatest attention.

About two hours after this occurrence, we heard the ground sea;
and before night the ice broke, and freed our ship. We, however, lay
to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large
loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice. I
profited of this time to rest for a few hours.

In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon
the deck, and found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel,
apparently talking to some one in the sea. It was, in fact, a
sledge, like that we had seen before, which had drifted towards us
in the night, on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive;
but there was a human being within it, whom the sailors were
persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller
seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but
an European. When I appeared on deck, the master said, "Here is our
captain, and he will not allow you to perish on the open sea."

On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although
with a foreign accent. "Before I come on board your vessel," said
he, "will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?"

You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question
addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction, and to whom
I should have supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which
he would not have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can
afford. I replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery
towards the northern pole.

Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied, and consented to come
on board. Good God! Margaret, if you had seen the man who thus
capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been boundless.
His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by
fatigue and suffering. I never saw a man in so wretched a condition.
We attempted to carry him into the cabin; but as soon as he had
quitted the fresh air, he fainted. We accordingly brought him back
to the deck, and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy,
and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as he showed
signs of life we wrapped him up in blankets, and placed him near the
chimney of the kitchen stove. By slow degrees he recovered, and ate
a little soup, which restored him wonderfully.

Two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak; and
I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of
understanding. When he had in some measure recovered, I removed him to
my own cabin, and attended on him as much as my duty would permit. I
never saw a more interesting creature: his eyes have generally an
expression of wildness, and even madness, but there are moments
when, if anyone performs an act of kindness towards him, or does him
any the most trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as
it were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that I never saw
equalled. But he is generally melancholy and despairing; and sometimes
he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that
oppresses him.

When my guest was a little recovered, I had great trouble to
keep off the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but I
would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a
state of body and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon
entire repose. Once, however, the lieutenant asked, Why he had come so
far upon the ice in so strange a vehicle?

His countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest
gloom; and he replied, "To seek one who fled from me."

"And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?"

"Yes."

"Then I fancy we have seen him; for the day before we picked you
up, we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the
ice."

This aroused the stranger's attention; and he asked a multitude of
questions concerning the route which the daemon, as he called him, had
pursued. Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said,- "I have,
doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good
people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries."

"Certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in
me to trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine."

"And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you
have benevolently restored me to life."

Soon after this he inquired if I thought that the breaking up of
the ice had destroyed the other sledge? I replied that I could not
answer with any degree of certainty; for the ice had not broken
until near midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place
of safety before that time; but of this I could not judge.

From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of
the stranger. He manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck, to
watch for the sledge which had before appeared; but I have persuaded
him to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the
rawness of the atmosphere. I have promised that some one should
watch for him, and give him instant notice if any new object should
appear in sight.

Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up
to the present day. The stranger has gradually improved in health, but
is very silent, and appears uneasy when any one except myself enters
his cabin. Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the
sailors are all interested in him, although they have had very
little communication with him. For my own part, I begin to love him as
a brother; and his constant and deep grief fills me with sympathy
and compassion. He must have been a noble creature in his better days,
being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable.

I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should
find no friend on the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, before
his spirit had been broken by misery, I should have been happy to have
possessed as the brother of my heart.

I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at
intervals, should I have any fresh incidents to record.

My affection for my guest increases every day. He excites at
once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. How can I see
so noble a creature destroyed by misery, without feeling the most
poignant grief? He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so
cultivated; and when he speaks, although his words are culled with the
choicest art, yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.

He is now much recovered from his illness, and is continually on
deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. Yet,
although unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery
but that he interests himself deeply in the projects of others. He has
frequently conversed with me on mine, which I have communicated to him
without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in
favour of my eventual success, and into every minute detail of the
measures I had taken to secure it. I was easily led by the sympathy
which he evinced to use the language of my heart; to give utterance to
the burning ardour of my soul; and to say, with all the fervour that
warmed me, how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my
every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise. One man's life or
death were but a small price to pay for the acquirement of the
knowledge which I sought; for the dominion I should acquire and
transmit over the elemental foes of our race. As I spoke, a dark gloom
spread over my listener's countenance. At first I perceived that he
tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before his eyes;
and my voice quivered and failed me, as I beheld tears trickle fast
from between his fingers- a groan burst from his heaving breast. I
paused;- at length he spoke, in broken accents:- "Unhappy man! Do
you share my madness? Have you drank also of the intoxicating draught?
Hear me- let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your
lips!"

Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but
the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his
weakened powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation
were necessary to restore his composure.

Having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared to
despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the
dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself
personally. He asked me the history of my earlier years. The tale
was quickly told: but it awakened various trains of reflection. I
spoke of my desire of finding a friend- of my thirst for a more
intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot;
and expressed my conviction that a man could boast of little
happiness, who did not enjoy this blessing.

"I agree with you," replied the stranger; "we are unfashioned
creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than
ourselves such a friend ought to be- do not lend his aid to
perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend, the
most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge
respecting friendship. You have hope, and the world before you, and
have no cause for despair. But I- I have lost everything, and cannot
begin life anew."

As he said this, his countenance became expressive of a calm
settled grief that touched me to the heart. But he was silent, and
presently retired to his cabin.

Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than
he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and every
sight afforded by these wonderful regions, seem still to have the
power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double
existence: he may suffer misery, and be overwhelmed by
disappointments; yet, when he has retired into himself, he will be
like a celestial spirit that has a halo around him, within whose
circle no grief or folly ventures.

Will you smile at the enthusiasm I express concerning this
divine wanderer? You would not if you saw him. You have been tutored
and refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are,
therefore, somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit
to appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man.
Sometimes I have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he
possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I
ever knew. I believe it to be an intuitive discernment; a quick but
never-failing power of judgment; a penetration into the causes of
things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility
of expression, and a voice whose varied intonations are
soul-subduing music.

Yesterday the stranger said to me, "You may easily perceive,
Captain Walton, that I have suffered great and unparalleled
misfortunes. I had determined, at one time, that the memory of these
evils should die with me; but you have won me to alter my
determination. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I
ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a
serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not know that the
relation of my disasters will be useful to you; yet, when I reflect
that you are pursuing the same course, exposing yourself to the same
dangers which have rendered me what I am, I imagine that you may
deduce an apt moral from my tale; one that may direct you if you
succeed in your undertaking, and console you in case of failure.
Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous.
Were we among the tamer scenes of nature, I might fear to encounter
your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear
possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke
the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of
nature:- nor can I doubt but that my tale conveys in its series
internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed."

You may easily imagine that I was much gratified by the offered
communication; yet I could not endure that he should renew his grief
by a recital of his misfortunes. I felt the greatest eagerness to hear
the promised narrative, partly from curiosity, and partly from a
strong desire to ameliorate his fate, if it were in my power. I
expressed these feelings in my answer.

"I thank you," he replied, "for your sympathy, but it is
useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and
then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling," continued
he, perceiving that I wished to interrupt him; "but you are
mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing
can alter my destiny: listen to my history, and you will perceive
how irrevocably it is determined."

He then told me that he would commence his narrative the next
day when I should be at leisure. This promise drew from me the warmest
thanks. I have resolved every night, when I am not imperatively
occupied by my duties, to record, as nearly as possible in his own
words, what he has related during the day. If I should be engaged, I
will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you
the greatest pleasure; but to me, who know him, and who hear it from
his own lips, with what interest and sympathy shall I read it in
some future day! Even now, as I commence my task, his full-toned voice
swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me with all their
melancholy sweetness; I see his thin hand raised in animation, while
the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul within.
Strange and harrowing must be his story; frightful the storm which
embraced the gallant vessel on its course, and wrecked it- thus!

CHAPTER I

I AM by birth a Genevese; and my family is one of the most
distinguished of that republic.

My ancestors had been for many years counsellors and syndics;
and my father had filled several public situations with honour and
reputation. He was respected by all who knew him for his integrity and
indefatigable attention to public business. He passed his younger days
perpetually occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of
circumstances had prevented his marrying early, nor was it until the
decline of life that he became a husband and the father of a family.

As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I
cannot refrain from relating them. One of his most intimate friends
was a merchant, who, from a flourishing state, fell, through
numerous mischances, into poverty. This man, whose name was
Beaufort, was of a proud and unbending disposition, and could not bear
to live in poverty and oblivion in the same country where he had
formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. Having paid
his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with
his daughter to the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in
wretchedness. My father loved Beaufort with the truest friendship, and
was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate
circumstances. He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his
friend to a conduct so little worthy of the affection that united
them. He lost no time in endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope
of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and
assistance.

Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself; and it
was ten months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at
this discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean
street, near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair
alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money
from the wreck of his fortunes; but it was sufficient to provide him
with sustenance for some months, and in the meantime he hoped to
procure some respectable employment in a merchant's house. The
interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became
more deep and rankling when he had leisure for reflection; and at
length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end of three
months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable any exertion.

His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness- but she
saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing, and
that there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort
possessed a mind of an uncommon mould; and her courage rose to support
her in her adversity. She procured plain work; she plaited straw;
and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely
sufficient to support life.

Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew worse; her
time was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of
subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her
arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her;
and she knelt by Beaufort's coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father
entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor
girl, who committed herself to his care; and after the interment of
his friend, he conducted her to Geneva, and placed her under the
protection of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline became
his wife.

There was a considerable difference between the ages of my
parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in
bonds of devoted affection. There was a sense of justice in my
father's upright mind, which rendered it necessary that he should
approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had
suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved, and
so was disposed to set a greater value on tried worth. There was a
show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother,
differing wholly from the doating fondness of age, for it was inspired
by reverence for her virtues, and a desire to be the means of, in some
degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which
gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was
made to yield to her wishes and her convenience. He strove to
shelter her, as a fair exotic is sheltered by the gardener, from every
rougher wind, and to surround her with all that could tend to excite
pleasurable emotion in her soft and benevolent mind. Her health, and
even the tranquillity of her hitherto constant spirit, had been shaken
by what she had gone through. During the two years that had elapsed
previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all
his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought
the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change of scene and interest
attendant on a tour through that land of wonders, as a restorative for
her weakened frame.

From Italy they visited Germany and France. I, their eldest child,
was born in Naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their
rambles. I remained for several years their only child. Much as they
were attached to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible
stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me.
My mother's tender caresses, and my father's smile of benevolent
pleasure while regarding me, are my first recollections. I was their
plaything and their idol, and something better- their child, the
innocent and helpless creature bestowed on them by Heaven, whom to
bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in their hands to direct
to happiness fulfilled their duties towards me. With this deep
consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which they had
given life, added to the active spirit of tenderness that animated
both, it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant
life I received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of self-control,
I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of
enjoyment to me.

For a long time I was their only care. My mother had much
desired to have a daughter, but I continued their single offspring.
When I was about five years old, while making an excursion beyond
the frontiers of Italy, they passed a week on the shores of the Lake
of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the
cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, was more than a duty; it was
a necessity, a passion- remembering what she had suffered, and how she
had been relieved- for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to
the afflicted. During one of their walks a poor cot in the foldings of
a vale attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate,
while the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of
penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gone by himself
to Milain, my mother, accompanied by me, visited this abode. She found
a peasant and his wife, hard working, bent down by care and labour,
distributing a scanty meal to five hungry babes. Among these there was
one which attracted my mother far above all the rest. She appeared
of a different stock. The four others were dark-eyed, hardy little
vagrants; this child was thin, and very fair. Her hair was the
brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing, seemed
to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was clear and
ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of her
face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness, that none could
behold her without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being
heaven-sent, and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.

The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of
wondering admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her
history. She was not her child, but the daughter of a Milanese
nobleman. Her mother was a German, and had died on giving her birth.
The infant had been placed with these good people to nurse: they
were better off then. They had not been long married, and their eldest
child was but just born. The father of their charge was one of those
Italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory of Italy- one among
the schiaviognor frementi, who exerted himself to obtain the liberty
of his country. He became the victim of weakness. Whether he had died,
or still lingered in the dungeons of Austria, was not known. His
property was confiscated, his child became an orphan and a beggar. She
continued with her foster parents, and bloomed in their rude abode,
fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.

When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in
the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub- a
creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks, and whose form
and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills. The apparition
was soon explained. With his permission my mother prevailed on her
rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the
sweet orphan. Her presence had seemed a blessing to them; but it would
be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and want, when Providence
afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village
priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of
my parents' house- my more than sister- the beautiful and adored
companion of all my occupations and my pleasures.

Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential
attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my
pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought
to my home, my mother had said playfully- "I have a pretty present for
my Victor- tomorrow he shall have it." And when, on the morrow, she
presented Elizabeth to me as her promised gift, I, with childish
seriousness, interpreted her words literally, and looked upon
Elizabeth as mine- mine to protect, love, and cherish. All praises
bestowed on her, I received as made to a possession of my own. We
called each other familiarly by the name of cousin. No word, no
expression could body forth the kind of relation in which she stood to
me- my more than sister, since till death she was to be mine only.

CHAPTER II

WE WERE brought up together; there was not quite a year difference
in our ages. I need not say that we were strangers to any species of
disunion or dispute. Harmony was the soul of our companionship, and
the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us
nearer together. Elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated
disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a more
intense application, and was more deeply smitten with a thirst for
knowledge. She busied herself with following the aerial creations of
the poets; and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded
our Swiss home- the sublime shapes of the mountains; the changes of
the seasons; tempest and calm; the silence of winter, and the life and
turbulence of our Alpine summers- she found ample scope for admiration
and delight. While my companion contemplated with a serious and
satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in
investigating their causes. The world was to me a secret which I
desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden
laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me,
are among the earliest sensations I can remember.

On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents
gave up entirely their wandering life, and fixed themselves in their
native country. We possessed a house in Geneva, and a campagne on
Belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more
than a league from the city. We resided principally in the latter, and
the lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. It
was my temper to avoid a crowd, and to attach myself fervently to a
few. I was indifferent, therefore, to my schoolfellows in general; but
I united myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among
them. Henry Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva. He was a
boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and
even danger, for its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry
and romance. He composed heroic songs, and began to write many a
tale of enchantment and knightly adventure. He tried to make us act
plays, and to enter into masquerades, in which the characters were
drawn from the heroes of Roncesvalles, of the Round Table of King
Arthur, and the chivalrous train who shed their blood to redeem the
holy sepulchre from the hands of the infidels.

No human being could have passed a happier childhood than
myself. My parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and
indulgence. We felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot
according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the
many delights which we enjoyed. When I mingled with other families,
I distinctly discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and
gratitude assisted the development of filial love.

My temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but
by some law in my temperature they were turned, not towards childish
pursuits, but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things
indiscriminately. I confess that neither the structure of languages,
nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states,
possessed attractions for me. It was the secrets of heaven and earth
that I desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of
things, or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man
that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the
metaphysical, or, in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the
world.

Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral
relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes,
and the actions of men, were his theme; and his hope and his dream was
to become one among those whose names are recorded in story, as the
gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. The saintly soul
of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful
home. Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet
glance of her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us.
She was the living spirit of love to soften and attract: I might
have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature,
but that she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own
gentleness. And Clerval- could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit-
of Clerval?- Yet he might not have been so perfectly humane, so
thoughtful in his generosity- so full of kindness and tenderness
amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to
him the real loveliness of beneficence, and made the doing good the
end and aim of his soaring ambition.

I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of
childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind, and changed its
bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow
reflections upon self. Besides, drawing the picture of early days, I
also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after
tale of misery: for when I would account to myself for the birth of
that passion, which afterwards ruled my destiny, I find it arise
like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources
but, swelling as it as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in
its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.

Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I
desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led
to my predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years of age,
we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon: the
inclemency of the weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the
inn. In this house I chanced to find a volume of the works of
Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with apathy; the theory which he
attempts to demonstrate, and the wonderful facts which he relates,
soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to
dawn upon my mind; and, bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery
to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my
book, and said, "Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste
your time upon this; it is sad trash."

If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to
explain to me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely
exploded, and that a modern system of science had been introduced,
which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the
powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were
real and practical; under such circumstances, I should certainly
have thrown Agrippa aside, and have contented my imagination, warmed
as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It
is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have
received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance
my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was
acquainted with its contents; and I continued to read with the
greatest avidity.

When I returned home, my first care was to procure the whole works
of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I
read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight;
they appeared to me treasures known to few beside myself I have
described myself as always having been embued with a fervent longing
to penetrate the secrets of nature. In spice of the intense labour and
wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my
studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have
avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells beside the great
and unexplored ocean of truth. Those of his successors in each
branch of natural philosophy with whom I was acquainted appeared, even
to my boys apprehensions, as tyros engaged in the same pursuit.

The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him, and was
acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher
knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of Nature, but
her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might
dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final
cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly
unknown to him. I had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments
that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of
nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined.

But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper
and knew more. I took their word for all that they averred, and I
became their disciple. It may appear strange that such should arise in
the eighteenth century; but while I followed the routine of
education in the schools of Geneva, I was, to a great degree, self
taught with regard to my favourite studies. My father was not
scientific, and I was left to struggle with a child's blindness, added
to a student's thirst for knowledge. Under the guidance of my new
preceptors, I entered with the greatest diligence into the search of
the philosopher's stone and the elixir of life; but the latter soon
obtained my undivided attention. Wealth was an inferior object; but
what glory would attend the discovery, if I could banish disease
from the human frame, and render man invulnerable to any but a violent
death!

Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils
was a promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the
fulfillment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations
were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own
inexperience and mistake than to a want of skill or fidelity in my
instructors. And thus for a time I was occupied by exploded systems,
mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories, and
floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge,
guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an
accident again changed the current of my ideas.

When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house
near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible
thunderstorm. It advanced from behind the mountains of Jura; and the
thunder burst at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of
the heavens. I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress
with curiosity and delight. As I stood at the door, on a sudden I
beheld a stream of fire issue from an old and beautiful oak which
stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as the dazzling
light vanished the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a
blasted stump. When we visited it the next morning, we found the
tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splintered by the
shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribands of wood. I never beheld
anything so utterly destroyed.

Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of
electricity. On this occasion a man of great research in natural
philosophy was with us, and, excited by this catastrophe, he entered
on the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of
electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to
me. All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa,
Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by
some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my
accustomed studies. It seemed to me as if nothing would or could
ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew
despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind, which we are perhaps
most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former
occupations; set down natural history and all its progeny as a
deformed and abortive creation; and entertained the greatest disdain
for a would-be science, which could never even step within the
threshold of real knowledge. In this mood of mind I betook myself to
the mathematics, and the branches of study appertaining to that
science, as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my
consideration.

Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight
ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back, it
seems to me as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and
will was the immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life-
the last effort made by the spirit of preservation to avert the
storm that was even then hanging in the stars, and ready to envelope
me. Her victory was announced by an unusual tranquillity and
gladness of soul, which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and
latterly tormenting studies. It was thus that I was to be taught to
associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.

It was a strong effort of the spirit of good; but it was
ineffectual. Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had
decreed my utter and terrible destruction.

CHAPTER III

WHEN I had attained the age of seventeen, my parents resolved that
I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had
hitherto attended the schools of Geneva; but my father thought it
necessary, for the completion of my education, that I should be made
acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. My
departure was therefore fixed at an early date; but before the day
resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life
occurred- an omen, as it were, of my future misery.

Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe,
and she was in the greatest danger. During her illness, many arguments
had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon
her. She had, at first, yielded to our entreaties; but when she
heard that the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no
longer control her anxiety. She attended her sick bed- her watchful
attentions triumphed over the malignity of the distemper- Elizabeth
was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her
preserver. On the third day my mother sickened; her fever was
accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the looks of her
medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her death-bed
the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert
her. She joined the hands of Elizabeth and myself:- "My children," she
said, "my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the
prospect of your union. This expectation will now be the consolation
of your father. Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my
younger children. Alas! I regret that I am taken from you; and,
happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all?
But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign
myself cheerfully to death, and will indulge a hope of meeting you
in another world."

She died calmly; and her countenance expressed affection even in
death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties
are rent by that most irreparable evil; the void that presents
itself to the soul; and the despair that is exhibited on the
countenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade itself that
she, whom we saw every day, and whose very existence appeared a part
of our own, can have departed for ever- that the brightness of beloved
eye can have been extinguished, and the sound of a voice so
familiar, and dear to the ear, can be hushed, never more to be
heard. These are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse
of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness
of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away
some dear connection? and why should I describe a sorrow which all
have felt, and must feel? The time at length arrives, when grief is
rather an indulgence than a necessity; and the smile that plays upon
the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished. My
mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; we
must continue our course with the rest, and learn to think ourselves
fortunate, whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.

My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these
events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a
respite of some weeks. It appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave
the repose, akin to death, of the house of mourning, and to rush
into the thick of life. I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less
alarm me. I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained
to me; and, above all, I desired to see my sweet Elizabeth in some
degree consoled.

She indeed veiled her grief, and strove to act the comforter to us
all. She looked steadily on life, and assumed its duties with
courage and zeal. She devoted herself to those whom she had been
taught to call her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as
at this time when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent
them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make
us forget.

The day of my departure at length arrived. Clerval spent the
last evening with us. He had endeavoured to persuade his father to
permit him to accompany me, and to become my fellow student; but in
vain. His father was a narrow-minded trader, and saw idleness and ruin
in the aspirations and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the
misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education. He said little;
but when he spoke, I read in his kindling eye and in his animated
glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the
miserable details of commerce.

We sat late. We could not tear ourselves away from each other, nor
persuade ourselves to say the word "Farewell!" It was said; and we
retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the
other was deceived: but when at morning's dawn I descended to the
carriage which was to convey me away, they were all there- my father
again to bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth to
renew her entreaties that I would write often, and to bestow the
last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.

I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away, and
indulged in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been
surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in
endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure, I was now alone. In the
university, whither I was going, I must form my own friends, and be my
own protector. My life had hitherto been remarkably secluded and
domestic; and this had given me invincible repugnance to new
countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these
were "old familiar faces"; but I believed myself totally unfitted
for the company of strangers. Such were my reflections as I
commenced my journey; but as I proceeded my spirits and hopes rose.
I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when
at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one
place, and had longed to enter the world, and take my station among
other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would,
indeed, have been folly to repent.

I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections
during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At
length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted, and
was conducted to my solitary apartment, to spend the evening as I
pleased.

The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction and paid a
visit to some of the principal professors. Chance- or rather the
evil influence, the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent
sway over me from the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my
father's door- led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural
philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply embued in the secrets of
his science. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in
the different branches of science appertaining to natural
philosophy. I replied carelessly; and, partly in contempt, mentioned
the names of my alchymists as the principal authors I had studied. The
professor stared; "Have you," he said, "really spent your time in
studying such nonsense?"

I replied in the affirmative. "Every minute," continued M.
Krempe with warmth, "every instant that you have wasted on those books
is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with
exploded systems and useless names. Good God! in what desert land have
you lived, where no one was kind enough to inform you that these
fancies, which you have so greedily imbibed, are a thousand years old,
and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected, in this
enlightened and scientific age, to find a disciple of Albertus
Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear sir, you must begin your studies
entirely anew."

So saying, he stepped aside, and wrote down a list of several
books treating of natural philosophy, which he desired me to
procure; and dismissed me, after mentioning that in the beginning of
the following week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon
natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman,
fellow-professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that
he omitted.

I returned home, not disappointed, for I have said that I had long
considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but
I returned, not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies
in any shape. M. Krempe was a little squat man, with a gruff voice and
a repulsive countenance the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess
me in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and
connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the
conclusions I had come to concerning them in my early years. As a
child, I had not been content with the results promised by the
modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only
to be accounted for by my extreme youth, and my want of a guide on
such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of
time, and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams
of forgotten alchymists. Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of
modern natural philosophy. It was very different when the masters of
the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile,
were grand: but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the
inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions
on which my interest in science was chiefly founded. I was required to
exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.

Such were my reflections during the first two or three days of
my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
acquainted with the localities, and the principal residents in my
new abode. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the
information which M. Krempe had given me concerning the lectures.
And although I could not consent to go and hear that little
conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what
he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto
been out of town.

Partly from curiosity, and partly from idleness, I went into the
lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor
was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age,
but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few
grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of his head were
nearly black. His person was short, but remarkably erect; and his
voice the sweetest I had ever heard. He began his lecture by a
recapitulation of the history of chemistry, and the various
improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with
fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He then
took a cursory view of the present state of the science, and explained
many of its elementary terms. After having made a few preparatory
experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry,
the terms of which I shall never forget:-

"The ancient teachers of this science," said he, "promised
impossibilities, and performed nothing. The modern masters promise
very little they know that metals cannot be transmuted, and that the
elixir of life is a chimera. But these philosophers, whose hands
seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the
microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate
into the recesses of nature, and show how she works in her hiding
places. They ascend into the heavens: they have discovered how the
blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe. They have
acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the
thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the
invisible world with its own shadows."

Such were the professor's words- rather let me say such the
words of fate, enounced to destroy me. As he went on, I felt as if
my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various
keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being: chord
after chord was sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought,
one conception, one purpose. So much has been done, exclaimed the soul
of Frankenstein- more, far more, will I achieve: treading in the steps
already marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers,
and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.

I closed not my eyes that night. My internal being was in a
state of insurrection and turmoil; I felt that order would thence
arise, but I had no power to produce it. By degrees after the
morning's dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight's thoughts
were as a dream. There only remained a resolution to return to my
ancient studies, and to devote myself to a science for which I
believed myself to possess a natural talent. On the same day, I paid
M. Waldman a visit. His manners in private were even more mild and
attractive than in public; for there was a certain dignity in his mien
during his lecture, which in his own house was replaced by the
greatest affability and kindness. I gave him pretty nearly the same
account of my former pursuits as I had given to his
fellow-professor. He heard with attention the little narration
concerning my studies, and smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa
and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. Krempe had exhibited.
He said, that "these were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern
philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their
knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new
names, and arrange in connected classifications, the facts which
they in a great degree had been the instruments of bringing to
light. The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed,
scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of
mankind." I listened to his statement, which was delivered without any
presumption or affectation; and then added, that his lecture had
removed my prejudices against modern chemists; I expressed myself in
measured terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his
instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have
made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended
labours. I requested his advice concerning the books I ought to
procure.

"I am happy," said M. Waldman, "to have gained a disciple; and
if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt of your
success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the
greatest improvements have been and may be made: it is on that account
that I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time I have not
neglected the other branches of science. A man would make but a very
sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge
alone. If your wish is to become really a man of science, and not
merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to
every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics."

He then took me into his laboratory, and explained to me the
uses of his various machines; instructing me as to what I ought to
procure, and promising me the use of his own when I should have
advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism.
He also gave me the list of books which I had requested; and I took my
leave.

Thus ended a day memorable to me: it decided my future destiny.

CHAPTER IV

FROM this memorable day natural philosophy, and particularly
chemistry, in the most comprehensive sense of the term, became
nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works, so full
of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on
these subjects. I attended the lectures, and cultivated the
acquaintance, of the men of science of the university; and I found
even in M. Krempe a great deal of sound sense and real information,
combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy and manners, but
not on that account the less valuable. In M. Waldman I found a true
friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism and his
instructions were given with an air of frankness and good nature
that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand ways he smoothed
for me the path of knowledge, and made the most abstruse inquiries
clear and facile to my apprehension. My application was at first
fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded, and soon
became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the
light of morning whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory.

As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my
progress was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the
students, and my proficiency that of the masters. Professor Krempe
often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on?
whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my
progress. Two years passed in this manner, during which I paid no
visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of
some discoveries, which I hoped to make. None but those who have
experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science. In
other studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and
there is nothing more to know; but in a scientific pursuit there is
continual food for discovery and wonder. A mind of moderate
capacity, which closely pursues one study, must infallibly arrive at
great proficiency in that study; and I, who continually sought the
attainment of one object of pursuit, and was solely wrapped up in
this, improved so rapidly that, at the end of two years, I made some
discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments which
procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. When I
had arrived at this point, and had become as well acquainted with
the theory and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the
lessons of any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there
being no longer conducive to my improvement, I thought of returning to
my friends and my native town, when an incident happened that
protracted my stay.

One of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention
was the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued
with life. Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life
proceed? It was a bold question, and one which has ever been
considered as a mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the
brink of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not
restrain our inquiries. I revolved these circumstances in my mind, and
determined thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those
branches of natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I
had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application
to this study would have been irksome, and almost intolerable. To
examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I
became acquainted with the science of, anatomy: but this was not
sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of
the human body. In my education my father had taken the greatest
precautions that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural
horrors. I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of
superstition, or to have feared the apparition of a spirit. Darkness
had no effect upon my fancy; and a churchyard was to me merely the
receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of
beauty and strength, had become food for the worm. Now I was led to
examine the cause and progress of this decay, and forced to spend days
and nights in vaults and charnel-houses. My attention was fixed upon
every object the most insupportable to the delicacy of the human
feelings. I saw how the fine form of man was degraded and wasted; I
beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of
life; I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I
paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as
exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until
from the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me- a
light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became
dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was
surprised, that among so many men of genius who had directed their
inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to
discover so astonishing a secret.

Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun
does not more certainly shine in the heavens, than that which I now
affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of
the discovery were distinct and probable. After days and nights of
incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of
generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing
animation upon lifeless matter.

The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this
discovery soon gave place to delight and rapture. After so much time
spent in painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires
was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery
was so great and overwhelming that all the steps by which I had been
progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the
result. What had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the
creation of the world was now within my grasp. Not that, like a
magic scene, it all opened upon me at once: the information I had
obtained was of a nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as I
should point them towards the object of my search, than to exhibit
that object already accomplished. I was like the Arabian who had
been buried with the dead, and found a passage to life, aided only
by one glimmering, and seemingly ineffectual, light.

I see by your eagerness, and the wonder and hope which your eyes
express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret
with which I am acquainted; that cannot be: listen patiently until the
end of my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon
that subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then
was, to your destruction and infallible misery. Learn from me, if
not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the
acquirement of knowledge, and how much happier that man is who
believes his native town to be the world, than he who aspires to
become greater than his nature will allow.

When I found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I
hesitated a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ
it. Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to
prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of
fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable
difficulty and labour. I doubted at first whether I should attempt the
creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organisation; but
my imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit me
to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and
wonderful as man. The materials at present within my command hardly
appeared adequate to so arduous an undertaking; but I doubted not that
I should ultimately succeed. I prepared myself for a multitude of
reverses; my operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my
work be imperfect: yet, when I considered the improvement which
every day takes place in science and mechanics, I was encouraged to
hope my present attempts would at least lay the foundations of
future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of
my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with these
feelings that I began the creation of a human being. As the minuteness
of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved,
contrary to my first intention, to make the being of a gigantic
stature; that is to say, about eight feet in height, and
proportionably large. After having formed this determination, and
having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my
materials, I began.

No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards,
like a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death
appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and
pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless
me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would
owe their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his
child so completely as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these
reflections, I thought, that if I could bestow animation upon lifeless
matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it
impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body
to corruption.

These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my
undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with
study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes,
on the very brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the
hope which the next day or the next hour might realise. One secret
which I alone possessed was the hope to which I had dedicated
myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with
unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her
hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil, as
I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave, or tortured the
living animal, to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble
and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but then a resistless, and
almost frantic, impulse urged me forward; I seemed to have lost all
soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was indeed but a
passing trance that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon
as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had returned to my
old habits. I collected bones from charnel-houses; and disturbed, with
profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame. In a
solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house, and
separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase,
I kept my workshop of filthy creation: my eye-balls were starting from
their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. The
dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my
materials; and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my
occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually
increased, I brought my work near to a conclusion.

The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul,
in one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season; never did the fields
bestow a more plentiful harvest, or the vines yield a more luxuriant
vintage: but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And
the same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me
also to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I
had not seen for so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them;
and I well remembered the words of my father: "I know that while you
are pleased with yourself, you will think of us with affection, and we
shall hear regularly from you. You must pardon me if I regard any
interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your other
duties are equally neglected."

I knew well, therefore, what would be my father's feelings; but
I could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in
itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination.
I wished, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings
of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of
my nature, should be completed.

I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my
neglect to vice, or faultiness on my part; but I am now convinced that
he was justified in conceiving that I should not be altogether free
from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a
calm and peaceful mind, and never to allow passion or a transitory
desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not think that the pursuit of
knowledge is an exception to this rule. If the study to which you
apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections, and to
destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can
possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say,
not befitting the human mind. If this rule were always observed; if no
man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere with the
tranquillity of his domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved,
Caesar would have spared his country; America would have been
discovered more gradually; and the empires of Mexico and Peru had
not been destroyed.

But I forget that I am moralising in the most interesting part
of my tale; and your looks remind me to proceed.

My father made no reproach in his letters, and only took notice of
my silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than
before. Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours;
but I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves- sights
which before always yielded me supreme delight- so deeply was I
engrossed in my occupation. The leaves of that year had withered
before my work drew near to a close; and now every day showed me
more plainly how well I had succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked
by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one doomed by slavery to
toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade, than an artist
occupied by his favourite employment. Every night I was oppressed by a
slow fever, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of
a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow-creatures as if I had been
guilty of a crime. Sometimes I grew alarmed at the wreck I perceived
that I had become- the energy of my purpose alone sustained me: my
labours would soon end, and I believed that exercise and amusement
would then drive away incipient disease; and I promised myself both of
these when my creation should be complete.

CHAPTER V

IT WAS on a dreary night of November that I beheld the
accomplishment of my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to
agony, collected the instruments of life around me, that I might
infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet.
It was already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally
against the panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the
glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the dull yellow eye of
the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion
agitated its limbs.

How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how
delineate the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had
endeavoured to form? His limbs were in proportion, and I had
selected his features as beautiful. Beautiful!- Great God! His
yellow skin scarcely covered the work of muscles and arteries beneath;
his hair was of a lustrous black, and flowing; his teeth of a pearly
whiteness; but these luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast
with his watery eyes, that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun
white sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion and
straight black lips.

The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the
feelings of human nature. I had worked hard for nearly two years,
for the sole purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. For this
I had deprived myself of rest and health. I had desired it with an
ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that I had finished,
the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust
filled my heart. Unable to endure the aspect of the being I had
created, I rushed out of the room, continued a long time traversing my
bed chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. At length lassitude
succeeded to the tumult I had before endured; and I threw myself on
the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of
forgetfulness. But it was in vain: I slept, indeed, but I was
disturbed by the wildest dreams. I thought I saw Elizabeth, in the
bloom of health, walking in the streets of Ingolstadt. Delighted and
surprised, I embraced her; but as I imprinted the first kiss on her
lips, they became livid with the hue of death; her features appeared
to change, and I thought that I held the corpse of my dead mother in
my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and I saw the grave-worms
crawling in the folds of the flannel. I started from my sleep with
horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and
every limb became convulsed: when, by the dim and yellow light of
the moon, as it forced its way through the window shutters, I beheld
the wretch- the miserable monster whom I had created. He held up the
curtain of the bed and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were
fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate
sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks. He might have spoken, but
I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me,
but I escaped, and rushed down stairs. I took refuge in the
courtyard belonging to the house which I inhabited; where I remained
during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest
agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as
if it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to
which I had so miserably given life.

Oh! no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. A
mummy again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that
wretch. I had gazed on him while unfinished he was ugly then; but when
those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became
a thing such as even Dante could not have conceived.

I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat so
quickly and hardly that I felt the palpitation of every artery; at
others, I nearly sank to the ground through languor and extreme
weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the bitterness of
disappointment; dreams that had been my food and pleasant rest for
so long a space were now become a hell to me; and the change was so
rapid, the overthrow so complete!

Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned, and discovered to my
sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, white steeple
and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates
of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into
the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the
wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my
view. I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but
felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which
poured from a black and comfortless sky.

I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring, by
bodily exercise, to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I
traversed the streets, without any clear conception of where I was, or
what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear; and I
hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:-

"Like one who, on a lonely road,

Doth walk in fear and dread,

And, having once turned round, walks on,

And turns no more his head;

Because he knows a frightful fiend

Doth close behind him tread."*

* Coleridge's Ancient Mariner

Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the
various diligences and carriages usually stopped. Here I paused, I
knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a
coach that was coming towards me from the other end of the street.
As it drew nearer, I observed that it was the Swiss diligence: it
stopped just where I was standing, and, on the door being opened, I
perceived Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out.
"My dear Frankenstein," exclaimed he, "how glad I am to see you! how
fortunate that you should be here at the very moment of my alighting!"

Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval; his presence
brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes
of home so dear to my recollection. I grasped his hand, and in a
moment forgot my horror and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the
first time during many months, calm and serene joy. I welcomed my
friend, therefore, in the most cordial manner, and we walked towards
my college. Clerval continued talking for some time about our mutual
friends, and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to
Ingolstadt. "You may easily believe," said he, "how great was the
difficulty to persuade my father that all necessary knowledge was
not comprised in the noble art of bookkeeping; and, indeed, I
believe I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to
my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch
school-master in the Vicar of Wakefield:- 'I have ten thousand florins
a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.' But his affection
for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has
permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of
knowledge."

"It gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how
you left my father, brothers, and Elizabeth."

"Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear
from you so seldom. By the by, I mean to lecture you a little upon
their account myself.- But, my dear Frankenstein," continued he,
stopping short, and gazing full in my face, "I did not before remark
how very ill you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been
watching for several nights."

"You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in
one occupation that I have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as
you see: but I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments
are now at an end, and that I am at length free."

I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think of, and far
less to allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night. I walked
with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then
reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I
had left in my apartment might still be there, alive, and walking
about. I dreaded to behold this monster; but I feared still more
that Henry should see him. Entreating him, therefore, to remain a
few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own
room. My hand was already on the lock of the door before I recollected
myself I then paused; and a cold shivering came over me. I threw the
door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to do when they
expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them on the other side; but
nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty; and
my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly
believe that so great a good fortune could have befallen me; but
when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, I clapped my
hands for joy, and ran down to Clerval.

We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought
breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself It was not joy only that
possessed me; I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and
my pulse beat rapidly. I was unable to remain for a single instant
in the same place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and
laughed aloud. Clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy
on his arrival; but when he observed me more attentively he saw a
wildness in my eyes for which he could not account; and my loud,
unrestrained, heartless laughter frightened and astonished him.

"My dear Victor," cried he, "what, for God's sake, is the
matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the
cause of all this?"

"Do not ask me," cried I, putting my hands before my eyes for I
thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; "he can
tell.- Oh, save me! save me!" I imagined that the monster seized me; I
struggled furiously, and fell down in a fit.

Poor Clerval! what must have been his feelings? A meeting, which
he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I
was not the witness of his grief, for I was lifeless, and did not
recover my senses for a long, long time.

This was the commencement of a nervous fever, which confined me
for several months. During all that time Henry was my only nurse. I
afterwards learned that, knowing my father's advanced age, and
unfitness for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would
make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent
of my disorder. He knew that I could not have a more kind and
attentive nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my
recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed
the kindest action that he could towards them.

But I was in reality very ill; and surely nothing but the
unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend could have
restored me to life. The form of the monster on whom I had bestowed
existence was forever before my eyes, and I raved incessantly
concerning him. Doubtless my words surprised Henry: he at first
believed them to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagination; but
the pertinacity with which I continually recurred to the same subject,
persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon
and terrible event.

By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed
and grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I became
capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, I
perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared, and that the young
buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. It
was a divine spring; and the season contributed greatly to my
convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in
my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time I became as
cheerful as before I was attacked by the fatal passion.

"Dearest Clerval," exclaimed I, "how kind, how very good you are
to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you
promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever
repay you? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which
I have been the occasion; but you will forgive me."

"You will repay me entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but
get well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good
spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?"

I trembled. One subject! what could it be? Could he allude to an
object on whom I dared not even think?

"Compose yourself," said Clerval, who observed my change of
colour, "I will not mention it, if it agitates you; but your father
and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in
your own handwriting. They hardly know how ill you have been, and
are uneasy at your long silence."

"Is that all, my dear Henry? How could you suppose that my first
thoughts would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom I love,
and who are so deserving of my love."

"If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be
glad to see a letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is
from your cousin, I believe."

CHAPTER VI

CLERVAL then put the following letter into hands. It was from
my own Elizabeth:-

My dearest Cousin,- You have been ill, very ill, and even the
constant letters of dear kind Henry are not sufficient to reassure me
on your account. You are forbidden to write- to hold a pen; yet one
word from you, dear Victor, is necessary to calm our apprehensions.
For a long time I have thought that each post would bring this line,
and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey
to Ingolstadt. I have prevented his encountering the inconveniences
and perhaps dangers of so long a journey; yet how often have I
regretted not being able to perform it myself! I figure to myself that
the task of attending on your sick bed has devolved on some mercenary
old nurse, who could never guess your wishes, nor minister to them
with the care and affection of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now:
Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that
you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting.

Get well- and return to us. You will find a happy, cheerful
home, and friends who love you dearly. Your father's health is
vigorous, and he asks but to see you- but to be assured that you are
well; not a care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance. How
pleased you would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is
now sixteen, and full of activity and spirit. He is desirous to be a
true Swiss, and to enter into foreign service; but we cannot part with
him, at least until his elder brother return to us. My uncle is not
pleased with the idea of a military career in a distant country; but
Ernest never had your powers of application. He looks upon study as an
odious fetter;- his time is spent in the open air, climbing the
hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that he will become an idler,
unless we yield the point, and permit him to enter on the profession
which he has selected.

Little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has
taken place since you left us. The blue lake, and snow-clad mountains,
they never change;- and I think our placid home and our contented
hearts are regulated by the same immutable laws. My trifling
occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I am rewarded for any
exertions by seeing none but happy, kind faces around me. Since you
left us, but one change has taken place in our little household. Do
you remember on what occasion Justine Moritz entered our family?
Probably you do not; I will relate her history, therefore, in a few
words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of
whom Justine was the third. This girl had always been the favourite of
her father; but through a strange perversity, her mother could not
endure her, and after the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My
aunt observed this- and, when Justine was twelve years of age,
prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at our house. The
republican institutions of our country have produced simpler and
happier manners than those which prevail in the great monarchies
that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the
several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being
neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and
moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant
in France and England. Justine, thus received in our family, learned
the duties of a servant, a condition which, in our fortunate
country, does not include the idea of ignorance, and a sacrifice of
the dignity of a human being.

Justine, you may remember, was a great favourite of yours; and I
recollect you once remarked, that if you were in an ill-humour, one
glance from Justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that
Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of Angelica- she looked so
frank-hearted and happy. My aunt conceived a great attachment for
her, by which she was induced to give her an education superior to
that which she had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid;
Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: I do not
mean that she made any professions; I never heard one pass her lips;
but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her
protectress. Although her disposition was gay, and in many respects
inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of
my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence, and
endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now
she often reminds me of her.

When my dearest aunt died, everyone was too much occupied in their
own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her
illness with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill;
but other trials were reserved for her.

One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The
conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the
deaths of her favourites was a judgment from heaven to chastise her
partiality. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor
confirmed the idea which she had conceived. Accordingly, a few
months after your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by
her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our
house; she was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had
given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before
been remarkable for vivacity. Nor was her residence at her mother's
house of a nature to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very
vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive
her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the
deaths of her brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting at length
threw Madame Moritz into a decline, which at first increased her
irritability, but she is now at peace forever. She died on the first
approach of cold weather, at the beginning of this last winter.
Justine has returned to us; and I assure you I love her tenderly.
She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned
before, her mien and her expressions continually remind me of my
dear aunt.

I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little
darling William. I wish you could see him; he is very tall for his
age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling
hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which
are rosy with health. He has already had one or two little wives,
but Louisa Biron is his favourite, a pretty little girl five years
of age.

Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little
gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield
has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching
marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly
sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn.
Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several
misfortunes since the departure of Clerval from Geneva. But he has
already recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of
marrying a very lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is
a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and
a favourite with everybody.

I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my
anxiety returns upon me as I conclude. Write, dearest Victor- one
line- one word will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks to
Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters: we are
sincerely grateful. Adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, I
entreat you, write!

        Elizabeth Lavenza.

"Dear, dear Elizabeth!" I exclaimed, when I had read her letter,
"I will write instantly, and relieve them from the anxiety they must
feel." I wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but my
convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. In another
fortnight I was able to leave my chamber.

One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval
to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I
underwent a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind
had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours,
add the beginning of my misfortunes, I had conceived a violent
antipathy even to the name of natural philosophy. When I was otherwise
quite restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would
renew all the agony of my nervous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had
removed all my apparatus from my view. He had also changed my
apartment; for he perceived that I had acquired a dislike for the room
which had previously been my laboratory. But these cares of Clerval
were made of no avail when I visited the professors. M. Waldman
inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the
astonishing progress I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived
that I disliked the subject; but not guessing the real cause, he
attributed my feelings to modesty, and changed the subject from my
improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw,
of drawing me out. What could I do? He meant to please, and he
tormented me. I felt as if he had placed carefully, one by one, in
my view those instruments which were to be afterwards used in
putting me to a slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words, yet
dared not exhibit the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings
were always quick in discerning the sensations of others, declined the
subject, alleging, in excuse, his total ignorance; and the
conversation took a more general turn. I thanked my friend from my
heart, but I did not speak. I saw plainly that he was surprised, but
he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and although I loved him
with a mixture of affection and reverence that knew no bounds, yet I
could never persuade myself to confide to him that event which was
so often present to my recollection, but which I feared the detail
to another would only impress more deeply.

M. Krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that
time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums
gave me even more pain than the benevolent approbation of M.
he has outstript us all. Ay, stare if you please; but it is
nevertheless true. A youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in
Cornelius Agrippa as firmly as in the gospel, has now set himself at
the head of the university; and if he is not soon pulled down, we
shall all be out of countenance.- Ay, ay," continued he, observing
my face expressive of suffering, "M. Frankenstein is modest; an
excellent quality in a young man. Young men should be diffident of
themselves, you know, M. Clerval: I was myself when young; but that
wears out in a very short time."

M. Krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily
turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.

Clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science;
and his literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had
occupied me. He came to the university with the design of making
himself complete master of the oriental languages, as thus he should
open a field for the plan of life he had marked out for himself
Resolved to pursue no inglorious career, he turned his eyes toward the
East, as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise. The Persian,
Arabic, and Sanscrit languages engaged his attention, and I was easily
induced to enter on the same studies. Idleness had ever been irksome
to me, and now that I wished to fly from reflection, and hated my
former studies, I felt great relief in being the fellow-pupil with
my friend, and found not only instruction but consolation in the works
of the orientalists. I did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge
of their dialects, for I did not contemplate making any other use of
them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their
meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is
soothing, and their elevating, to a degree I never experienced in
studying the authors of any other country. When you read their
writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses-
in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes
your own heart. How different from the manly and heroical poetry of
Greece and Rome!

Summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to Geneva
was fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several
accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed
impassable, and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. I
felt this delay very bitterly for I longed to see my native town and
my beloved friends. My return had only been delayed so long from an
unwillingness to leave Clerval in a strange place, before he had
become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however,
was spent cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late,
when it came its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.

The month of May had already commenced, and I expected the
letter daily which was to fix the date of my departure, when Henry
proposed a pedestrian tour in the environs of Ingolstadt, that I might
bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited. I
acceded with pleasure to this proposition: I was fond of exercise, and
Clerval had always been my favourite companion in the rambles of
this nature that I had taken among the scenes of my native country.

We passed a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and
spirits had long been restored, and they gained additional strength
from the salubrious air I breathed, the natural incidents of our
progress, and the conversation of my friend. Study had before secluded
me from the intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered me
unsocial; but Clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he
again taught me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces
of children. Excellent friend! how sincerely did you love me, and
endeavour to elevate my mind until it was on a level with your own!
A selfish pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness
and affection warmed and opened my senses; I became the same happy
creature who, a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow
or care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me
the most delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled
me with ecstasy. The present season was indeed divine; the flowers
of spring bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in
bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had
pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with
an invincible burden.

Henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my
feelings: he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the
sensations that filled his soul. The resources of his mind on this
occasion were truly astonishing: his conversation was full of
imagination; and very often, in imitation of the Persian and Arabic
writers, he invented tales of wonderful fancy and passion. At other
times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew me out into arguments,
which he supported with great ingenuity.

We returned to our college on a Sunday afternoon: the peasants
were dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My own
spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled
joy and hilarity.

CHAPTER VII

ON MY return, I found the following letter from my father,-

My dear Victor,- You have probably waited impatiently for a letter
to fix the date of your return to us; and I was at first tempted to
write only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which I should
expect you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do
it. What would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and
glad welcome, to behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness?
And how, Victor, can I relate our misfortune? Absence cannot have
rendered you callous to our joys and griefs; and how shall I inflict
pain on my long absent son? I wish to prepare you for the woeful news,
but I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page, to
seek the words which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.

William is dead!- that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and
warmed my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! Victor, he is
murdered!

I will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the
circumstances of the transaction.

Last Thursday (May 7th), I, my niece, and your two brothers,
went to walk in Plainpalais. The evening was warm and serene, and we
prolonged our walk farther than usual. It was already dusk before we
thought of returning; and then we discovered that William and
Ernest, who had gone on before, were not to be found. We accordingly
rested on a seat until they should return. Presently Ernest came,
and inquired if we had seen his brother: he said, that he had been
playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and
that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards waited for him a long
time, but that he did not return.

This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he might have
returned to the house. He was not there. We returned again, with
torches; for I could not rest, when I thought that my sweet boy had
lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night;
Elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. About five in the morning I
discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had seen blooming
and active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the
print of the murderer's finger was on his neck.

He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my
countenance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth. She was very earnest
to see the corpse. At first I attempted to prevent her- but she
persisted, and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the
neck of the victim, and clasping her hands, exclaimed, "O God! I
have murdered my darling child!"

She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she
again lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told me that that
same evening William had teased her to let him wear a very valuable
miniature that she possessed of your mother. This picture is gone, and
was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed.
We have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover
him are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved Wilham!

Come, dearest Victor; you alone can console Elizabeth. She weeps
continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death;
her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an
additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter?
Your dear mother! Alas, Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not
live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!

Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the
assassin, but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal,
instead of festering, the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of
mourning, my friend, but with kindness and affection for those who
love you, and not with hatred for your enemies.- Your affectionate and
afflicted father,

    Alphonse Frankenstein.

Clerval, who had watched my countenance as I read this letter, was
surprised to observe the despair that succeeded to the joy I at
first expressed on receiving news from my friends. I threw the
letter on the table, and covered my face with my hands.

"My dear Frankenstein," exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me weep
with bitterness, "are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend, what
has happened?"

I motioned to him to take up the letter, while I walked up and
down the room in the extremest agitation. Tears also gushed from the
eyes of Clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune.

"I can offer you no consolation, my friend," said he; "your
disaster is irreparable. What do you intend to do?"

"To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the
horses."

During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of
consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. "Poor
William!" said he, "dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel
mother! Who that had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty,
but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the
murderer's grasp! How much more a murderer, that could destroy such
radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we;
his friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest. The pang is over, his
sufferings are at an end for ever. A sod covers his gentle form, and
he knows no pain. He can no longer be a subject for pity; we must
reserve that for his miserable survivors."

Clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
impressed themselves on my mind, and I remembered them afterwards in
solitude. But now, as soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a
cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.

My journey was very melancholy. At first I wished to hurry on, for
I longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing
friends; but when I drew near my native town, I slackened my progress.
I could hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that crowded into
my mind. I passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had
not seen for nearly six years. How altered everything might be
during that time! One sudden and desolating change had taken place;
but a thousand little circumstances might have by degrees worked other
alterations, which, although they were done more tranquilly, might not
be the less decisive. Fear overcame me; I dared not advance,
dreading a thousand nameless evils that made me tremble, although I
was unable to define them.

I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind.
I contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was
calm; and the snowy mountains, "the palaces of nature," were not
changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I
continued my journey towards Geneva.

The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as I
approached my native town. I discovered more distinctly the black
sides of Jura, and the bright summit of Mont Blanc. I wept like a
child. "Dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your
wanderer? Your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and
placid. Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?"

I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by
dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of
comparative happiness, and I think of them with pleasure. My
country, my beloved country! who but a native can tell the delight I
took in again beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than
all, thy lovely lake!

Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me.
Night also closed around; and when I could hardly see the dark
mountains, I felt still more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast and
dim scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to
become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly,
and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the misery I
imagined and dreaded, I did not conceive the hundredth part of the
anguish I was destined to endure.

It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs of Geneva;
the gates of the town were already shut; and I was obliged to pass the
night at Secheron, a village at the distance of half a league from the
city. The sky was serene; and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved
to visit the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I
could not pass through the town, I was obliged to cross the lake in
a boat to arrive at Plainpalais. During this short voyage I saw the
lightnings playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most beautiful
figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly; and, on landing, I
ascended a low hill, that I might observe its progress. It advanced;
the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming slowly in
large drops, but its violence quickly increased.

I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and
storm increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific
crash over my head. It was echoed from Saleve, the Juras, and the Alps
of Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an
instant everything seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye
recovered itself from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often
the case in Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the
heavens. The most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over
that part of the lake which lies between the promontory of Belrive and
the village of Copet. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint
flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Mole, a
peaked mountain to the east of the lake.

While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered
on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; I
clasped my hands, and exclaimed aloud, "William, dear angel! this is
thy funeral, this thy dirge!" As I said these words, I perceived in
the gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me;
I stood fixed, gazing intently: I could not be mistaken. A flash of
lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly
to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect, more
hideous than belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was
the wretch, the filthy daemon, to whom I had given life. What did he
there? Could he be (I shuddered at the conception) the murderer of
my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I
became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was forced to
lean against a tree for support. The figure passed me quickly, and I
lost it in the gloom. Nothing in human shape could have destroyed that
fair child. He was the murderer! I could not doubt it. The mere
presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact. I
thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for
another flash discovered him to me hanging among the rocks of the
nearly perpendicular ascent of Mont. Saleve, a hill that bounds
Plainpalais on the south. He soon reached the summit, and disappeared.

I remained motionless. The thunder ceased; but the rain still
continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness.
I revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to
forget: the whole train of my progress towards the creation; the
appearance of the work of my own hands alive at my bedside; its
departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which
he first received life; and was this his first crime? Alas! I had
turned loose into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in
carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother?

No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of
the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not
feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in
scenes of evil and despair. I considered the being whom I had cast
among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect
purposes of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly
in the light of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the
grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me.

Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town. The gates
were open, and I hastened to my father's house. My first thought was
to discover what I knew of the murderer and cause instant pursuit to
be made. But I paused when I reflected on the story that I had to
tell. A being whom I myself had formed, and endued with life, had
met me at midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. I
remembered also the nervous fever with which I had been seized just at
the time that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of
delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable. I well knew that
if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I should have
looked upon it as the ravings of insanity. Besides, the strange nature
of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were so far
credited as to persuade my relatives to commence it. And then of
what use would be pursuit? Who could arrest a creature capable of
scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Saleve? These reflections
determined me, and I resolved to remain silent.

It was about five in the morning when I entered my father's house.
I told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the
library to attend their usual hour of rising.

Six years had elapsed, passed as a dream but for one indelible
trace, and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my
father before my departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved and venerable
parent! He still remained to me. I gazed on the picture of my
mother, which stood over the mantel-piece. It was an historical
subject, painted at my father's desire, and represented Caroline
Beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead
father. Her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale; but there was an
air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of
pity. Below this picture was a miniature of William; and my tears
flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged, Ernest
entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me. He
expressed a sorrowful delight to see me: "Welcome, my dearest Victor,"
said he. "Ah! I wish you had come three months ago, and then you would
have found us all joyous and delighted! You come to us now to share
a misery which nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, I
hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and
your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and
tormenting self-accusations.- Poor William! he was our darling and our
pride!"

Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother's eyes; a sense of
mortal agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only imagined the'
wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a new,
and a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to calm Ernest; I
inquired more minutely concerning my father and her I named my cousin.

"She most of all," said Ernest, "requires consolation; she
accused herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that
made her very wretched. But since the murderer has been discovered-"

"The murderer discovered! Good God! how can that be? who could
attempt to pursue him? It is impossible; one might as well try to
overtake the winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw. I saw
him too; he was free last night!"

"I do not know what you mean," replied my brother, in accents of
wonder, "but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No
one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be
convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would
credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the
family, could suddenly become capable of so frightful, so appalling
a crime?"

"Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is
wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?"

"No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that
have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has
been so confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that,
I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be tried to-day, and
you will then hear all."

He related that, the morning on which the murder of poor Wilham
had been discovered, Justine had been taken ill, and confined to her
bed for several days. During this interval, one of the servants,
happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the
murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which
had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. The servant
instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word
to any of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their
deposition, Justine was apprehended. On being charged with the fact,
the poor girl confirmed the suspicion in a great measure by her
extreme confusion of manner.

This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and I
replied earnestly, "You are all mistaken; I know the murderer Justine,
poor, good Justine, is innocent."

At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply
impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me
cheerfully; and, after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would
have introduced some other topic than that of our disaster, had not
Ernest exclaimed, "Good God, papa! Victor says that he knows who was
the murderer of poor William."

"We do also, unfortunately," replied my father; "for indeed I
had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much
depravity and ingratitude in one I valued so highly."

"My dear father, you are mistaken; Justine is innocent."

"If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty. She is to
be tried to-day, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be
acquitted."

This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my own mind
that Justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this
murder. I had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence
could be brought forward strong enough to convict her. My tale was not
one to announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon
as madness by the vulgar. Did any one indeed exist, except I, the
creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the
existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance
which I had let loose upon the world?

We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I
last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the
beauty of her childish years. There was the same candour, the same
vivacity, but it was allied to an expression more full of
sensibility and intellect. She welcomed me with the greatest
affection. "Your arrival, my dear cousin," said she, "fills me with
hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless
Justine. Alas! who is safe, if she be convicted of crime? I rely on
her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is
doubly hard to us; we have not only lost that lovely darling boy,
but this poor girl, whom I sincerely love, is to be torn away by
even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more.
But she will not, I am sure she will not; and then I shall be happy
again, even after the sad death of my little William."

"She is innocent, my Elizabeth," said I, "and that shall be
proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance
of her acquittal."

"How kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her
guilt, and that made me wretched, for I knew that it was impossible:
and to see everyone else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered
me hopeless and despairing." She wept.

"Dearest niece," said my father, "dry your tears. If she is, as
you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the
activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of
partiality."

CHAPTER VIII

WE PASSED a few sad hours, until eleven o'clock, when the trial
was to commence. My father and the rest of the family being obliged to
attend as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court. During the whole
of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It
was to be decided, whether the result of my curiosity and lawless
devices would cause the death of two of my fellow-beings: one a
smiling babe, full of innocence and joy; the other far more dreadfully
murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the
murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit, and
possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy: now all
was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave; and I the cause! A
thousand times rather would I have confessed myself guilty of the
crime ascribed to Justine; but I was absent when it was committed, and
such a declaration would have been considered as the ravings of a
madman, and would not have exculpated her who suffered through me.

The appearance of Justine was calm. She was dressed in mourning;
and her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity
of her feelings, exquisitely beautiful. Yet she appeared confident
in innocence, and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated
by thousands; for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise
have excited, was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. She
was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as
her confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she
worked up her mind to an appearance of courage. When she entered the
court, she threw her eyes round it, and quickly discovered where we
were seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us; but she
quickly recovered herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to
attest her utter guiltlessness.

The trial began; and, after the advocate against her had stated
the charge, several witnesses were called. Several strange facts
combined against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not
such proof of her innocence as I had. She had been out the whole of
the night on which the murder had been committed, and towards
morning had been perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot
where the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found. The
woman asked her what she did there; but she looked very strangely, and
only returned a confused and unintelligible answer. She returned to
the house about eight o'clock; and, when one inquired where she had
passed the night, she replied that she had been looking for the child,
and demanded earnestly if anything had been heard concerning him. When
shown the body, she fell into violent hysterics, and kept her bed
for several days. The picture was then produced, which the servant had
found in her pocket; and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice,
proved that it was the same which, an hour before the child had been
missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and
indignation filled the court.

Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded,
her countenance had altered. Surprise, horror, and misery were
strongly expressed. Sometimes she struggled with her tears; but,
when she was desired to plead, she collected her powers, and spoke, in
an audible, although variable voice.

"God knows," she said, "how entirely I am innocent. But I do not
pretend that my protestations should acquit me: I rest my innocence on
a plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced
against me; and I hope the character I have always borne will
incline my judges to a favourable interpretation, where any
circumstance appears doubtful or suspicious."

She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she had
passed the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed
at the house of an aunt at Chene, a village situated at about a league
from Geneva. On her return, at about nine o'clock, she met a man,
who asked her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost.
She was alarmed by this account, and passed several hours in looking
for him, when the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was forced to
remain several hours of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage,
being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well
known. Most of the night she spent here watching; towards morning
she believed that she slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed
her, and she awoke. It was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that
she might again endeavour to find my brother. If she had gone near the
spot where his body lay, it was without her knowledge. That she had
been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not
surprising, since she had passed a sleepless night, and the fate of
poor William was yet uncertain. Concerning the picture she could
give no account.

"I know," continued the unhappy victim, "how heavily and fatally
this one circumstance weighs against me, but I have no power of
explaining it; and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only
left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have
been placed in my pocket. But here also I am checked. I believe that I
have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as
to destroy me wantonly. Did the murderer place it there? I know of
no opportunity afforded him for so doing; or, if I had, why should
he have stolen the jewel, to part with it again so soon?

"I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no
room for hope. I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined
concerning my character; and if their testimony shall not overweigh my
supposed guilt, I must be condemned, although I Would pledge my
salvation on my innocence."

Several witnesses were called, who had known her for many years,
and they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of
which they supposed her guilty rendered them timorous, and unwilling
to come forward. Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her
excellent dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the
accused, when, although violently agitated, she desired permission
to address the court.

"I am," said she, "the cousin of the unhappy child who was
murdered, or rather his sister, for I was educated by, and have
lived with his parents ever since and even long before, his birth.
It may, therefore, be judged indecent in me to come forward on this
occasion; but when I see a fellow-creature about to perish through the
cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to be allowed to speak,
that I may say what I know of her character. I am well acquainted with
the accused. I have lived in the same house with her, at one time
for five and at another for nearly two years. During all that period
she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent of human creatures.
She nursed Madame Frankenstein, my aunt, in her last illness, with the
greatest affection and care; and afterwards attended her own mother
during a tedious illness, in a manner that excited the admiration of
all who knew her; after which she again lived in my uncle's house,
where she was beloved by all the family. She was warmly attached to
the child who is now dead, and acted towards him like a most
affectionate mother. For my own part, I do not hesitate to say,
that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe
and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an
action: as to the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had
earnestly desired it, I should have willingly given it to her; so much
do I esteem and value her."

A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth's simple and powerful
appeal but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in
turned with renewed violence, on whom the public indignation was
turned with renewed violence, charging her with the blackest
ingratitude. She herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not
answer. My own agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole
trial. I believed in her innocence; I knew it. Could the daemon, who
had (I did not for a minute doubt) murdered my brother, also in his
hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? I
could not sustain the horror of my situation; and when I perceived
that the popular voice, and the countenances of the judges, had
already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the court in
agony. The tortures of the accused did not equal mine; she was
sustained by innocence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom, and
would not forego their hold.

I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. In the morning I
went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not ask
the fatal question; but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause
of my visit. The ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and
Justine was condemned.

I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before
experienced sensations of horror; and I have endeavoured to bestow
upon them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I
addressed myself added, that Justine had already confessed her
guilt. "That evidence," he observed, "was hardly required in so
glaring a case, but I am glad of it; and, indeed, none of our judges
like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so
decisive."

This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it
mean? Had my eyes deceived me? and was I really as mad as the whole
world would believe me to be, if I disclosed the object of my
suspicions? I hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly
demanded the result.

"My cousin," replied I, "it is decided as you may have expected;
all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer, than that one
guilty should escape. But she has confessed."

This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied with
firmness upon Justine's innocence. "Alas!" said she, "how shall I ever
again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as
my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to
betray? her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and
yet she has committed a murder."

Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to
see my cousin. My father wished her not to go; but said, that he
left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. "Yes," said
Elizabeth, "I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor,
shall accompany me: I cannot go alone." The idea of this visit was
torture to me, yet I could not refuse.

We entered the gloomy prison-chamber, and beheld Justine sitting
on some straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her
head rested on her knees. She rose on seeing us enter; and when we
were left alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of
Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My cousin wept also.

"Oh, Justine!" said she, "why did you rob me of my last
consolation? I relied on your innocence; and although I was then
very wretched, I was not so miserable as I am now."

"And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked? Do you
also join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?"
Her voice was suffocated with sobs.

"Rise, my poor girl," said Elizabeth, "why do you kneel, if you
are innocent? I am not one of your enemies; I believed you
guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you
had yourself declared your guilt. That report, you say, is false;
and be assured, dear Justine, that nothing can shake my confidence
in you for a moment, but your own confession."

"I did confess; but I confessed a lie. I confessed, that I might
obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart
than all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was
condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced,
until I almost began to think that I was the monster that he said I
was. He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments,
if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all
looked on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What
could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I
truly miserable."

She paused, weeping, and then continued- "I thought with horror,
my sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed
aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature
capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could go have
perpetrated. Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you
again in heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me,
going as I am to suffer ignominy and death."

"Oh, Justine! forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
Why did you confess? But do not mourn, dear girl. Do not fear. I
will proclaim, I will prove your innocence. I will melt the stony
hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers. You shall not die! No!
no! I never could survive so horrible a misfortune."

Justine shook her head mournfully. "I do not fear to die," she
said; "that pang is past. I leave a sad and bitter world; and if you
remember me, and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, I am
resigned to the fate awaiting me. Learn from me, dear lady, to
submit in patience to the will of Heaven!"

During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the
prison-room, where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed
me. I gnashed my teeth, and ground them together, uttering a groan
that came from my inmost soul. Justine started. When she saw who it
was, she approached me, and said, "Dear sir, you are kind to visit me;
you, I hope, do not believe that I am guilty?"

I could not answer. "No, Justine," said Elizabeth; "he is more
convinced of your innocence than I was; for even when he heard that
you had confessed, he did not credit it."

"I truly thank him. In these last moments I feel the sincerest
gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness. How sweet is
the affection of others to such a wretch as I am! It removes more than
half my misfortune; and I feel as if I could die in peace, now that my
innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin."

Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. She
indeed gained the resignation she desired. But I, the true murderer,
felt the never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no
hope or consolation. Elizabeth also wept, and was unhappy; but hers
also was the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over
the fair moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness.

Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with
difficulty repressed her bitter tears. She embraced Elizabeth, and
said, in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, "Farewell, sweet lady,
dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may this be the last
misfortune that you will ever suffer! Live, and be happy, and make
others so."

And on the morrow Justine died. Elizabeth's heartrending eloquence
failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the
criminality of the saintly sufferer. My passionate and indignant
appeals were lost upon them. And when I received their cold answers,
and heard the harsh unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed
avowal died away on my lips. Thus I might proclaim myself a madman,
but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim. She
perished on the scaffold as a murderess!

From the tortures of my own heart, I turned to contemplate the
deep and voiceless grief of my Elizabeth. This also was my doing!
And my father's woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling
home- all was the work of my thrice- accursed hands! Ye weep,
unhappy ones; but these are not your last tears! Again shall you raise
the funeral wall, and the sound of your lamentations shall again and
again be heard! Frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early,
much-loved friend- he bids you weep- to shed countless tears; happy
beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the
destruction pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your
sad torments!

Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and
despair, I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of
William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts!

CHAPTER IX

NOTHING is more painful to the human mind, than, after the
feelings have been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead
calmness of inaction and certainty which follows, and deprives the
soul both of hope and fear. Justine died; she rested; and I was alive.
The blood flowed freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and
remorse pressed on my heart, which nothing could remove. Sleep fled
from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had committed
deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much more
(I persuaded myself), was yet behind. Yet my heart overflowed with
kindness and the love of virtue. I had begun life with benevolent
intentions, and thirsted for the moment when I should put them in
practice, and make myself useful to my fellow-beings. Now all was
blasted: instead of that serenity of conscience, which allowed me to
look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to
gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense
of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures, such as
no language can describe.

This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps
never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I
shunned the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture
to me; solitude was my only consolation- deep, dark, deathlike
solitude.

My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my
disposition and habits, and endeavoured by arguments deduced from
the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life, to inspire
me with fortitude, and awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark
cloud which brooded over me. "Do you think, Victor," said he, "that
I do not suffer also? No one could love a child more than I loved your
brother" (tears came into his eyes as he spoke); "but is it not a duty
to the survivors, that we should refrain from augmenting their
unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty
owed to yourself; for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or
enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no
man is fit for society."

This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I
should have been the first to hide my grief, and console my friends,
if remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm with
my other sensations. Now I could only answer my father with a look
of despair, and endeavour to hide myself from his view.

About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This change
was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates
regularly at ten o'clock, and the impossibility of remaining on the
lake after that hour, had rendered our residence within the walls of
Geneva very irksome to me. I was now free. Often, after the rest of
the family had retired for the night, I took the boat, and passed many
hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by
the wind; and sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, I
left the boat to pursue its own course, and gave way to my own
miserable reflections. I was often tempted, when all was at peace
around me, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a
scene so beautiful and heavenly- if I except some bat, or the frogs,
whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I
approached the shore- often, I say, I was tempted to plunge into the
silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my calamities for
ever. But I was restrained, when I thought of the heroic and suffering
Elizabeth, whom I tenderly loved, and whose existence was bound up
in mine. I thought also of my father and surviving brother: should I
by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the
malice of the fiend whom I had let loose among them?

At these moments I wept bitterly, and wished that peace would
revisit my mind only that I might afford them consolation and
happiness. But that could not be. Remorse extinguished every hope. I
had been the author of unalterable evils; and I lived in daily fear,
lest the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new
wickedness. I had an obscure feeling that all was not over, and that
he would still commit some signal crime, which by its enormity
should almost efface the recollection of the past. There was always
scope for fear, so long as anything I loved remained behind. My
abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of him, I
gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and I ardently wished to
extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed. When I
reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all
bounds of moderation. I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest
peak of the Andes, could I, when there, have precipitated him to their
base. I wished to see him again, that I might wreak the utmost
extent of abhorrence on his head, and avenge the deaths of William and
Justine.

Our house was the house of mourning. My father's health was deeply
shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and
desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations;
all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe
and tears she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to
innocence so blasted and destroyed. She was no longer that happy
creature, who in earlier youth wandered with me on the banks of the
lake, and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects. The first of
those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth, had visited
her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles.

"When I reflect, my dear cousin," said she, "on the miserable
death of Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as
they before appeared to me. Before, I looked upon the accounts of vice
and injustice, that I read in books or heard from others, as tales
of ancient days, or imaginary evils; at least they were remote, and
more familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has
come home, and men appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other's
blood. Yet I am certainly unjust. Everybody believed that poor girl to
be guilty; and if she could have committed the crime for which she
suffered, assuredly she would have been the most depraved of human
creatures. For the sake of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of
her benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth,
and appeared to love as if it had been her own! I could not consent to
the death of any human being; but certainly I should have thought such
a creature unfit to remain in the society of men. But she was
innocent. I know, I feel she was innocent; you are of the same
opinion, and that confirms me. Alas! Victor, when falsehood can look
so like the truth, who can assure themselves of certain happiness? I
feel if I were walking on the edge of a precipice, towards which
thousands are crowding, and endeavouring to plunge me into the
abyss. William and Justine were assassinated, and the murderer
escapes; he walks about the world free, and perhaps respected. But
even if I were condemned to suffer on the scaffold for the same
crimes, I would not change places with such a wretch."

I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. I, not in
deed, but in effect, was the true murderer. Elizabeth read my
anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, "My
dearest friend, you must calm yourself These events have affected
me, God knows how deeply; but I am not so wretched as you are. There
is an expression of despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your
countenance, that makes me tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark
passions. Remember the friends around you, who centre all their
hopes in you. Have we lost the power of rendering you happy? Ah! while
we love- while we are true to each other, here in this land of peace
and beauty, your native country, we may reap every tranquil
blessing- what can disturb our peace?"

And could not such words from her whom I fondly prized before
every other gift of fortune, suffice to chase away the fiend that
lurked in my heart? Even as she spoke I drew near to her, as if in
terror; lest at that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me
of her.

Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth,
nor of heaven, could redeem my soul from woe: the very accents of love
were ineffectual. I was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial
influence could penetrate. The wounded deer dragging its fainting
limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which
had pierced it, and to die- was but a type of me.

Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed
me: but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to
seek, by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my
intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I
suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine
valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to
forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My
wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. I had
visited it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had passed since
then: I was a wreck- but nought had changed in those savage and
enduring scenes.

I performed the first part of my journey on horseback. I
afterwards hired a mule, as the more sure-footed, and least liable
to receive injury on these rugged roads. The weather was fine: it
was about the middle of the month of August, nearly two months after
the death of Justine; that miserable epoch from which I dated all my
woe. The weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet
deeper in the ravine of Arve. The immense mountains and precipices
that overhung me on every side- the sound of the river raging among
the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around, spoke of a
power mighty as Omnipotence- and I ceased to fear, or to bend before
any being less almighty than that which had created and ruled the
elements, here displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I
ascended higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing
character. Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains;
the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth
from among the trees, formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was
augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and
shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to
another earth, the habitations of another race of beings.

I passed the bridge of Pelissier, where the ravine, which the
river forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend the mountain that
overhangs it. Soon after I entered the valley of Chamounix. This
valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and
picturesque, as that of Servox, through which I had just passed. The
high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries; but I saw no
more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached
the road; I heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche, and
marked the smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and
magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding
aiguilles, and its tremendous dome overlooked the valley.

A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during
this journey. Some turn in the road, some new object suddenly
perceived and recognised, reminded me of days gone by, and were
associated with the light-hearted gaiety of boyhood. The very winds
whispered in soothing accents, and maternal nature bade me weep no
more. Then again the kindly influence ceased to act- I found myself
fettered again to grief, and indulging in all the misery of
reflection. Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the
world, my fears, and, more than all, myself- or, in a more desperate
fashion, I alighted, and threw myself on the grass, weighed down by
horror and despair.

At length I arrived at the village of Chamounix. Exhaustion
succeeded to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I
had endured. For a short space of time I remained at the window,
watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Blanc, and
listening to the rushing of the Arve, which pursued its noisy way
beneath. The same lulling sounds acted as a lullaby to my too keen
sensations: when I placed my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me;
I felt it as it came, and blest the giver of oblivion.

CHAPTER X

I SPENT the following day roaming through the valley. I stood
beside the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a
glacier, that with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of
the hills, to barricade the valley. The abrupt sides of vast mountains
were before me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few
shattered pines were scattered around; and the solemn silence of
this glorious presence-chamber of imperial Nature was broken only by
the brawling waves, or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder
sound of the avalanche, or the cracking reverberated along the
mountains of the accumulated ice, which, by the silent working of
immutable laws, was ever and anon rent and tom, if it had been but a
plaything in their hands. These sublime and magnificent scenes
afforded me the greatest consolation that I was capable of
receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of feeling; and
although they did not remove my grief, they subdued and
tranquillised it. In some degree, also, they diverted my mind from the
thoughts over which it had brooded for the last month. I retired to
rest at night; my slumbers, as it were, waited on and ministered to by
the assemblance of grand shapes which I had contemplated during the
day. They congregated round me; the unstained snowy mountaintop, the
glittering pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine; the
eagle, soaring amidst the clouds- they all gathered round me, and bade
me be at peace.

Where had they fled when the next morning I awoke? All of
soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every
thought. The rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the
summits of the mountains, so that I even saw not the faces of those
mighty friends. Still I would penetrate their misty veil, and seek
them in their cloudy retreats. What were rain and storm to me? My mule
was brought to the door, and I resolved to ascend to the summit of
Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it.
It had then filled me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the
soul, and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and
joy. The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always
the effect of solemnising my mind, and causing me to forget the
passing cares of life. I determined to go without a guide, for I was
well acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would
destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene.

The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual
and short windings, which enable you to surmount the
perpendicularity of the mountain. It is a scene terrifically desolate.
In a thousand spots the traces of the winter avalanche may be
perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground; some
entirely destroyed, others bent, leaning upon the jutting rocks of the
mountain, or transversely upon other trees. The path, as you ascend
higher, is intersected by ravines of snow, down which stones
continually roll from above; one of them is particularly dangerous, as
the slightest sound, such as even speaking in a loud voice, produces a
concussion of air sufficient to draw destruction upon the head of
the speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are sombre,
and add an air of severity to the scene. I looked on the valley
beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers which ran through
it, and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite mountains,
whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from
the dark sky, and added to the melancholy impression I received from
the objects around me. Alas! why does man boast of sensibilities
superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more
necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and
desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by every wind
that blows, and a chance word or scene that that word may convey to
us.

"We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.

We rise; one wandering thought pollutes the day.

We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,

Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;

It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,

The path of its departure still is free.

Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow;

Nought may endure but mutability!"

It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent. For
some time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A mist
covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze
dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is
very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending
low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is
almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it.
The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side
where I now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance
of a league; and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I
remained in a recess of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and
stupendous scene. The sea, or rather the vast river of ice, wound
among its dependent mountains, whose aerial summits hung over its
recesses. Their icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight over
the clouds. My heart, which was before sorrowful, now swelled with
something like joy; I exclaimed- "Wandering spirits, if indeed ye
wander, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint
happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life."

As I said this, I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some
distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed. He bounded
over the crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with caution;
his stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man. I
was troubled: a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize
me; but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I
perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
that it was the wretch whom I had created. I trembled with rage and
horror, resolving to wait his approach, and then close with him in
mortal combat. He approached; his countenance bespoke bitter, anguish,
combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness
rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely
observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of
utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive
of furious detestation and contempt.

"Devil," I exclaimed, "do you dare approach me? and do not you
fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
Begone, vile insect! or rather, stay, that I may trample you to
dust! and, oh! that I could, with the extinction of your miserable
existence, restore those victims whom you have so diabolically
murdered!"

"I expected this reception," said the daemon. "All men hate the
wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all
living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation
of one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus with
life? Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and
the rest of mankind. If you will comply with my conditions, I will
leave them and you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of
death, until it be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends."

"Abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are
too mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil! you reproach me
with your creation; come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark
which I so negligently bestowed."

My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.

He easily eluded me, and said-

"Be calm! I entreat you to hear me, before you give vent to your
hatred on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enough that you seek to
increase my misery? Life, although it may only be an accumulation of
anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it. Remember, thou hast made
me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine; my
joints more supple. But I will not be tempted to set myself in
opposition to thee. I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and
docile to my natural lord and king, if thou wilt also perform thy
part, the which thou owest me. Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to
every other, and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and
even thy clemency and affection, is most due. Remember that I am thy
creature; I ought to be thy Adam; but I am rather the fallen angel,
whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss,
from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good-
misery made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous."

"Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no community between
you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a
fight, in which one must fall."

"How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a
favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and
compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein: I was benevolent; my soul glowed
with love and humanity: but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my
creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your
fellow-creatures, who owe me nothing? they spurn and hate me. The
desert mountains and dreary glaciers are my refuge. I have wandered
here many days; the caves of ice, which I only do not fear, are a
dwelling to me, and the only one which man does not grudge. These
bleak skies I had, for they are kinder to me than your
fellow-beings. If the multitude of mankind knew of my existence,
they would do as you do, and arm themselves for my destruction.
Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no terms with
my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall share my wretchedness.
Yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an
evil which it only remains for you to make so great that not only
you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be swallowed up in
the whirlwinds of its rage. Let your compassion be moved, and do not
disdain me. Listen to my tale: when you have heard that, abandon or
commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The
guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in
their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me,
Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder; and yet you would, with a
satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the
eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare me: listen to me;
and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your;
hands."

"Why do you call to my remembrance," I rejoined, "circumstances,
of which I shudder to reflect, that I have been the miserable origin
and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first
saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed
you! You have made me wretched beyond expression. You have left me
no power to consider whether I am just to you or not. Begone!
relieve me from the sight of your detested form."

"Thus I relieve thee, my creator," he said, and placed his hated
hands before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; "thus I
take from thee a sight which you abhor. Still thou canst listen to me,
and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I
demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the
temperature of this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come
to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the heavens;
before it descends to hide itself behind yon snowy precipices, and
illuminate another world, you will have heard my story, and can
decide. On you it rests whether I quit forever the neighbourhood of
man, and lead a harmless life, or become the scourge of your
fellow-creatures, and the author of your own speedy ruin."

As he said this, he led the way across the ice: I followed. My
heart was full, I did not answer him; but, as I proceeded, I weighed
the various arguments that he had used, and determined at least to
listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion
confirmed my resolution. I had hitherto supposed him to be the
murderer of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or
denial of this opinion. For the first time, also, I felt what the
duties of a creator towards his creature were, and that I ought to
render him happy before I complained of his wickedness. These
motives urged me to comply with his demand. We crossed the ice,
therefore, and ascended the opposite rock. The air was cold, and the
rain again began to descend: we entered the hut, the fiend with an air
of exultation, I with a heavy heart and depressed spirits. But I
consented to listen; and, seating myself by the fire which my odious
companion had lighted, he thus began his tale.

CHAPTER XI

"IT IS with considerable difficulty that I remember the original
era of being: all the events of that period appear confused and
indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw,
felt, heard, and smelt, at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long
time before I learned to distinguish between the operations of my
various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed
upon my nerves, so that I was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then
came over me, and troubled me; but hardly had I felt this, when, by
opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light poured in upon me
again. I walked, and, I believe, descended; but I presently found a
great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies
had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now found
that I could wander on at liberty, with no obstacles which I could not
either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more oppressive to
me; and, the heat wearying me as I walked, I sought a place where I
could receive shade. This was the forest near Ingolstadt; and here I
lay by the side of a brook resting from my fatigue, until I felt
tormented by hunger and thirst. This roused me from my nearly
dormant state, and I ate some berries which I found hanging on the
trees, or lying on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook; and
then lying down, was overcome by sleep.

"It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and
half-frightened, as it were instinctively, finding myself so desolate.
Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of cold, I had
covered myself with some clothes; but these were insufficient to
secure me from the dews of night. I was a poor, helpless, miserable
wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain
invade me on all sides, I sat down and wept.

"Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens, and gave me a
sensation of pleasure. I started up, and beheld a radiant form rise
from among the trees.* I gazed with a kind of wonder. It moved slowly,
but it enlightened my path; and I again went out in search of berries.
I was still cold, when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak,
with which I covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. No distinct
ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger,
and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rung in my ears, and on
all sides various scents saluted me: the only object that I could
distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with
pleasure.

* The moon.

"Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
greatly lessened, when I began to distinguish my sensations from
each other. I gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied
me with drink, and the trees that shaded me with their foliage. I
was delighted when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which
often saluted my ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged
animals who had often intercepted the light from my eyes. I began also
to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me, and
to perceive the boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied
me. Sometimes I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds,
but was unable. Sometimes I wished to express my sensations in my
own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from
me frightened me into silence again.

"The moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a
lessened form, showed itself, while I still remained in the forest. My
sensations had, by this time, become distinct, and my mind received
every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light,
and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the
insect from the herb, and, by degrees, one herb from another. I
found that the sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of
the blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing.

"One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire which had
been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight
at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into
the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How
strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite
effects! I examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found
it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches; but they
were wet, and would not burn. I was pained at this, and sat still
watching the operation of the fire. The wet wood which I had placed
near the heat dried, and itself became inflamed. I reflected on
this; and by touching the various branches, I discovered the cause,
and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might
dry it, and have a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on, and
brought sleep with it, I was in the greatest fear lest my fire
should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and
leaves, and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak,
I lay on the ground, and sunk into sleep.

"It was morning when I awoke, and my first care was to visit the
fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a
flame. I observed this also, and contrived a fan of branches, which
roused the embers when they were nearly extinguished. When night
came again, I found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well
as heat; and that the discovery of this element was useful to me in my
food; for I found some of the offals that the travellers had left
had been roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries I
gathered from the trees. I tried, therefore, to dress my food in the
same manner, placing it on the live embers. I found that the berries
were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.

"Food, however, became scarce; and I often spent the whole day
searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger.
When I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto
inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would
be more easily satisfied. In this emigration, I exceedingly lamented
the loss of the fire which I had obtained through accident, and knew
not how to reproduce it. I gave several hours to the serious
consideration of this difficulty; but I was obliged to relinquish
all attempt to supply it; and, wrapping myself up in my cloak, I
struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I passed three days in
these rambles, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall
of snow had taken place the night before, and the fields were of one
uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found my feet
chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the ground.

"It was about seven in the morning, and I longed to obtain food
and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground,
which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd.
This was a new sight to me; and I examined the structure with great
curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it,
near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on
hearing a noise; and, perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and, quitting
the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated
form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had
ever before seen, and his flight, somewhat surprised me. But I was
enchanted by the appearance of the hut: here the snow and rain could
not penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as
exquisite and divine a retreat as Pandaemonium appeared to the daemons
of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily
devoured the remnants of the shepherd's breakfast, which consisted
of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not like.
Then, overcome by fatigue, I lay down among some straw, and fell
asleep.

"It was noon when I awoke; and, allured by the warmth of the
sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to
recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant's
breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for
several hours, until at sunset I arrived at a village. How
miraculous did this appear! the huts, the neater cottages, and stately
houses, engaged my admiration by turns. The vegetables in the gardens,
the milk and cheese that I saw placed at the windows of some of the
cottages, allured my appetite. One of the best of these I entered; but
I had hardly placed my foot within the door, before the children
shrieked, and one of the women fainted. The whole village was
roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by
stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the
open country, and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare,
and making a wretched appearance after the palaces I had beheld in the
village. This hovel, however, joined a cottage of a neat and
pleasant appearance; but, after my late dearly bought experience, I
dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
low that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. No wood,
however, was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was
dry; and although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found
it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.

"Here then I retreated, and lay down happy to have found a
shelter, however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and
still more from the barbarity of man.

"As soon as morning dawned, I crept from my kennel, that I might
view the adjacent cottage, and discover if I could remain in the
habitation I had found. It was situated against the back of the
cottage, and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pig-sty
and a clear pool of water. One part was open, and by that I had
crept in; but now I covered every crevice by which I might be
perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that I might move
them on occasion to pass out: all the light I enjoyed came through the
sty, and that was sufficient for me.

"Having thus arranged my dwelling, and carpeted it with clean
straw, I retired; for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I
remembered too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in
his power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that
day, by a loaf of course bread, which I purloined, and a cup with
which I could drink, more conveniently than from my hand, of the
pure water which flowed by my retreat. The floor was a little
raised, so that it was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to
the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm.

"Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel until
something should occur which might alter my determination. It was
indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence,
the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. I ate my breakfast with
pleasure, and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little
water, when I heard a step, and looking through a small chink, I
beheld a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my
hovel. The girl was young, and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have
since found cottagers and farm-house servants to be. Yet she was
meanly dressed, a coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her
only garb; her fair hair was plaited, but not adorned: she looked
patient, yet sad. I lost sight of her; and in about a quarter of an
hour she returned, bearing the pail, which was now partly filled
with milk. As she walked along, seemingly incommoded by the burden,
a young man met her, whose countenance expressed a deeper despondence.
Uttering a few sounds with an air of melancholy, he took the pail from
her head, and bore it to the cottage himself. She followed, and they
disappeared. Presently I saw the young man again, with some tools in
his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was also
busied, sometimes in the house, and sometimes in the yard.

"On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows of
the cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been
filled up with wood. In one of these was a small and almost
imperceptible chink, through which the eye could just penetrate.
Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and
clean, but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire,
sat an old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate
attitude. The young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but
presently she took something out of a drawer, which employed her
hands, and she sat down beside the old man, who, taking up an
instrument, began to play, and to produce sounds sweeter than the
voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a lovely sight, even to
me, poor wretch! who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The
silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my
reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love. He
played a sweet mournful air, which I perceived drew tears from the
eyes of his amiable companion, of which the old man took no notice,
until she sobbed audibly; he then pronounced a few sounds, and the
fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He raised her, and
smiled with such kindness and affection that I felt sensations of a
peculiar and over-powering nature: they were a mixture of pain and
pleasure, such as I had never before experienced, either from hunger
or cold, warmth or food; and I withdrew from the window, unable to
bear these emotions.

"Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his
shoulders a load of wood. The girl met him at the door, helped to
relieve him of his burden, and, taking some of the fuel into the
cottage, placed it on the fire; then she and the youth went apart into
a nook of the cottage and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of
cheese. She seemed pleased, and went into the garden for some roots
and plants, which she placed in water, and then upon the fire. She
afterwards continued her work, whilst the young man went into the
garden, and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up
roots. After he had been employed thus about an hour, the young
woman joined him, and they entered the cottage together.

"The old man had, in the meantime, been pensive; but, on the
appearance of his companions, he assumed a more cheerful air, and they
sat down to eat. The meal was quickly despatched. The young woman
was again occupied in arranging the cottage; the old man walked before
the cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the
youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two
excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a
countenance beaming with benevolence and love: the younger was
slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded
with the finest symmetry; yet his eyes and attitude expressed the
utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the cottage;
and the youth, with tools different from those he had used in the
morning, directed his steps across the fields.

"Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found that the
cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and
was delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end
to the pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbours. In
the evening, the young girl and her companion were employed in various
occupations which I did not understand; and the old man again took
up the instrument which produced the divine sounds that had
enchanted me in the morning. So soon as he had finished, the youth
began, not to play, but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and
neither resembling the harmony of the old man's instrument nor the
songs of the birds: I since found that he read aloud, but at that time
I knew nothing of the science of words or letters.

"The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time,
extinguished their lights, and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.

CHAPTER XII

"I LAY on my straw, but I could not sleep. I thought of the
occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle
manners of these people; and I longed to join them, but dared not. I
remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before from
the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I
might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present I would
remain quietly in my hovel, watching, and endeavouring to discover the
motives which influenced their actions.

"The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. The young
woman arranged the cottage, and prepared the food; and the youth
departed after the first meal.

"This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded
it. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl
in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon
perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or
in contemplation. Nothing could exceed the love and respect which
the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion.
They performed towards him every little office of affection and duty
with gentleness; and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.

"They were not entirely happy. The young man and his companion
often went apart, and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their
unhappiness; but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures
were miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and
solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings
unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my
eyes) and every luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill, and
delicious viands when hungry; they were dressed in excellent
clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one another's company and
speech, interchanging each day looks of affection and kindness. What
did their tears imply? Did they really express pain? I was at first
unable to solve these questions; but perpetual attention and time
explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic.

"A considerable period elapsed before I discovered one of the
causes of the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty; and
they suffered that evil in a very distressing degree. Their
nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden,
and the milk of one cow, which gave very little during the winter,
when its masters could scarcely procure food to support it. They
often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly,
especially the two younger cottagers; for several times they placed
food before the old man when they reserved none for themselves.

"This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been
accustomed, during the night to steal a part of their store for my own
consumption; but when I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on
the cottagers, I abstained, and satisfied myself with berries, nuts,
and roots, which I gathered from a neighbouring wood.

"I discovered also another means through which I was enabled to
assist their labours. I found that the youth spent a great part of
each day in collecting wood for the family fire; and, during the
night, I often took his tools, the use of which I quickly
discovered, and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption
of several days.

"I remember the first time that I did this the young woman, when
she opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on
seeing a great pile of wood on the outside. She uttered some words
in a loud voice, and the youth joined her, who also expressed
surprise. I observed, with pleasure, that he did not go to the
forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating
the garden.

"By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found
that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience
and feelings to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the
words they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or
sadness, in the minds and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed
a godlike science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with
it. But I was baffled in every attempt I made for this purpose.
Their pronunciation was quick; and the words they uttered, not
having any apparent connection with visible objects, I was unable to
discover any clue by which I could unravel the mystery of their
reference. By great application, however, and after having remained
during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, I
discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar
objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, fire, milk,
bread, and wood. I learned also the names of the cottagers themselves.
The youth and his companion had each of them several names, but the
old man had only one, which was father. The girl was called sister, or
Agatha; and the youth Felix, brother, or son. I cannot describe the
delight I felt when I learned the ideas appropriated to each of
these sounds, and was able to pronounce them. I distinguished
several other words, without being able as yet to understand or
apply them; such as good, dearest, unhappy.

"I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and
beauty of the cottagers greatly endeared them to me: when they were
unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathised in
their joys. I saw few human beings beside them; and if any other
happened to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait
only enhanced to me the superior accomplishments of my friends. The
old man, I could perceive, often endeavoured to encourage his
children, as sometimes I found that he called them, to cast off
their melancholy. He would talk in a cheerful accent, with an
expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha
listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she
endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her
countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the
exhortations of her father. It was not thus with Felix. He was
always the saddest of the group; and, even to my unpractised senses,
he appeared to have suffered more deeply than his friends. But if
his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful than
that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man.

"I could mention innumerable instances, which, although slight,
marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of
poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure to his sister the
first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy
ground. Early in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away
the snow that obstructed her path to the milkhouse, drew water from
the well, and brought the wood from the out-house, where, to his
perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an
invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a
neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth, and did not return
until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. At other times he worked
in the garden; but, as there was little to do in the frosty season, he
read to the old man and Agatha.

"This reading had puzzled me extremely at first; but, by
degrees, I discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when
he read as when he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found
on the paper signs for speech which he understood, and I ardently
longed to comprehend these also; but how was that possible, when I did
not even understand the sounds for which they stood as signs? I
improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to
follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind
to the endeavour: for I easily perceived that, although I eagerly
longed to discover myself to the cottagers, I ought not to make the
attempt until I had first become master of their language; which
knowledge might enable me to make them overlook the deformity of my
figure; for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to my
eyes had made me acquainted.

"I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers- their grace,
beauty, and delicate complexions: but how was I terrified when I
viewed myself in a transparent pool! At first I started back, unable
to believe that it was indeed I who was reflected in the mirror; and
when I became fully convinced that I was in reality the monster that I
am, I was filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and
mortification. Alas! I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects
of this miserable deformity.

"As the sun became warmer, and the light of day longer, the snow
vanished, and I beheld the bare trees and the black earth. From this
time Felix was more employed; and the heart-moving indications of
impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards found, was
coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it.
Several new kinds of plants sprung up in the garden, which they
dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season
advanced.

"The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it
did not rain, as I found it was called when the heavens poured forth
its waters. This frequently took place; but a high wind quickly
dried the earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had
been.

"My mode of life in my hovel was uniform. During the morning, I
attended the motions of the cottagers; and when they were dispersed in
various occupations I slept: the remainder of the day was spent in
observing my friends. When they had retired to rest, if there was
any moon, or the night was star-light, I went into the woods, and
collected my own food and fuel for the cottage. When I returned, as
often as it was necessary, I cleared their path of the snow, and
performed those offices that I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards
found that these labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly
astonished them; and once or twice I heard them, on these occasions,
utter the words good spirit, wonderful; but I did not then
understand the signification of these terms.

"My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to discover
the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was
inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad.
I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore
happiness to these deserving people. When I slept, or was absent,
the forms of the venerable blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the
excellent Felix flitted before me, I looked upon them as superior
beings, who would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my
imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and
their reception of me. I imagined that they would be disgusted, until,
by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, I should first win
their favour, and afterwards their love.

"These thoughts exhilarated me, and led me to apply with fresh
ardour to the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed
harsh, but supple: and although my voice was very unlike the soft
music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood with
tolerable ease. It was as the and the lap-dog; yet surely the
gentle whose intentions were affectionate, although his manners
were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and execration.

"The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly
altered the aspect of the earth. Men, who before this change seemed to
have been hid in caves, dispersed themselves, and were employed in
various arts of cultivation. The birds sang in more cheerful notes,
and the leaves began to bud forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth!
fit habitation for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak,
damp, and unwholesome. My spirits were elevated by the enchanting
appearance of nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present
was tranquil, and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and
anticipations of joy."

CHAPTER XIII

"I NOW hasten to the more moving part of my story. I shall
relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had
been, have made me what I am.

"Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine, and the skies
cloudless. It surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy
should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. My
senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight,
and a thousand sights of beauty.

"It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically
rested from labour- the old man played on his guitar, and the children
listened to him- that I observed the countenance of Felix was
melancholy beyond expression; he sighed frequently; and once his
father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner that he
inquired the cause of his son's sorrow. Felix replied in a cheerful
accent, and the old man was recommencing his music when some one
tapped at the door.

"It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a countryman as a
guide. The lady was dressed in a dark suit, and covered with a thick
black veil. Agatha asked a question; to which the stranger only
replied by pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of Felix. Her
voice was musical, but unlike that of either of my friends. On hearing
this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady; who, when she saw him,
threw up her veil, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and
expression. Her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously
braided; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her
features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously
fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink.

"Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every trait
of sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed a
degree of ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly have believed it
capable; his eyes sparkled as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and
at that moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She
appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her
lovely eyes, she held out her hand to Felix, who kissed it
rapturously, and called her, as well as I could distinguish, his sweet
Arabian. She did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He assisted
her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the
cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father;
and the young stranger knelt at the old man's feet, and would have
kissed his hand, but he raised her, and embraced her affectionately.

"I soon perceived that, although the stranger uttered articulate
sounds, and appeared to have a language of her own, she was neither
understood by, nor herself understood, the cottagers. They made many
signs which I did not comprehend; but I saw that her presence diffused
gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun
dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy, and
with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle
Agatha, kissed the hands of the lovely stranger; and, pointing to
her brother, made signs which appeared to me to mean that he had
been sorrowful until she came. Some hours passed thus, while they,
by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of which I did not
comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some
sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she was
endeavouring to learn their language; and the idea instantly
occurred to me that I should make use of the same instructions to
the same end. The stranger learned about twenty words at the first
lesson, most of them, indeed, were those which I had before
understood, but I profited by the others.

"As night came on, Agatha and the Arabian retired early. When they
separated, Felix kissed the hand of the stranger, and said, 'Good
night, sweet Safie.' He sat up much longer, conversing with his
father; and, by the frequent repetition of her name, I conjectured
that their lovely guest was the subject of their conversation. I
ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards
that purpose, but found it utterly impossible.

"The next morning Felix went out to his work; and, after the usual
occupations of Agatha were finished, the Arabian sat at the feet of
the old man, and, taking his guitar, played some airs so
entrancingly beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and
delight from my eyes. She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich
cadence, swelling or dying away, like a nightingale of the woods.

"When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at
first declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice
accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the
stranger. The old man appeared enraptured, and said some words,
which Agatha endeavoured to explain to Safie, and by which he appeared
to wish to express that she bestowed on him the greatest delight by
her music.

"The days now passed as peacefully as before, with the sole
alteration that joy had taken the place of sadness in the countenances
of my friends. Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved
rapidly in the knowledge of language, so that in two months I began to
comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors.

"In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with
herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers,
sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the
moonlight woods; the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy,
and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they
were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of
the sun; for I never ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of
meeting with the same treatment I had formerly endured in the first
village which I entered.

"My days were spent in close attention, that I might more speedily
master the language; and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than
the Arabian, who understood very little, and conversed in broken
accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word
that was spoken.

"While I improved in speech, I also learned the science of
letters, as it was taught to the stranger; and this opened before me a
wide field for wonder and delight.

"The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney's Ruins
of Empires. I should not have understood the purport of this book, had
not Felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. He had
chosen this work, he said, because the declamatory style was framed in
imitation of the eastern authors. Through this work I obtained a
cursory knowledge of history, and a view of the several empires at
present existing in the world it gave me an insight into the
manners, governments, and religions of the different nations of the
earth. I heard of the slothful Asiatics; of the stupendous genius
and mental activity of the Grecians; of the wars and wonderful
virtue of the early Romans- of their subsequent degenerating- of the
decline of that mighty empire; of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I
heard of the discovery of the American hemisphere, and wept with Safie
over the hapless fate of its original inhabitants.

"These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings. Was
man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet
so vicious and base? He appeared at one time a mere scion of the
evil principle, and at another as all that can be conceived of noble
and godlike. To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest
honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as
many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition
more abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long
time I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his
fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I
heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased, and I turned
away with disgust and loathing.

"Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
While I listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed upon the
Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. I
heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid
poverty; of rank, descent, and noble blood.

"The words induced me to turn towards myself. I learned that the
possessions most esteemed by your fellow-creatures were high and
unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be respected with
only one of these advantages but, without either, he was considered,
except in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doomed to
waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few! And what was I? Of
my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant; but I knew that I
possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property. I was, besides,
endued with a figure hideously deformed and loathsome; I was not
even of the same nature as men. I was more agile than they, and
could subsist upon coarser diet; I bore the extremes of heat and
cold with less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs.
When I looked around, I saw and heard of none like me. Was I then a
monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled, and whom
all men disowned?

"I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections
inflicted upon me: I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased
with knowledge. Oh, that I had forever remained in my native wood, nor
known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!

"Of what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind,
when it has once seized on it, like a lichen on the rock. I wished
sometimes to shake off all thought and feeling; but I learned that
there was but one means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that
was death- a state which I feared yet did not understand. I admired
virtue and good feelings, and loved the gentle manners and amiable
qualities of my cottagers; but I was shut out from intercourse with
them, except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was
unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the
desire I had of becoming one among my fellows. The gentle words of
Agatha, and the animated smiles of the charming Arabian, were not
for me. The mild exhortations of the old man, and the lively
conversation of the loved Felix, were not for me. Miserable, unhappy
wretch!

"Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I heard of
the difference of sexes; and the birth and growth of children; how the
father doated on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of
the older child; how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped
up in the precious charge; how the mind of youth expanded and gained
knowledge; of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which
bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.

"But where were my friends and relations? No father had watched my
infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or
if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which
I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been as
I then was in height and proportion. I had never yet seen a being
resembling me, or who claimed any intercourse with me. What was I? The
question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.

"I will soon explain to what these feelings tended; but allow me
now to return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various
feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated
in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so I loved, in
an innocent, half painful self-deceit, to call them)."

CHAPTER XIV

"SOME time elapsed before I learned the history of my friends. It
was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind,
unfolding as it did a number of circumstances, each interesting and
wonderful to one so utterly inexperienced as I was.

"The name of the old man was De Lacey. He was descended from a
good family in France, where he had lived for many years in affluence,
respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals. His son was bred
in the service of his country; and Agatha had ranked with ladies of
the highest distinction. A few months before my arrival they had lived
in a large and luxurious city called Paris, surrounded by friends, and
possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or
taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford.

"The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin. He was a
Turkish merchant, and had inhabited Paris for many years,when, for
some reason which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to the
government. He was seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie
arrived from Constantinople to join him. He was tried and condemned to
death. The injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all Paris
was indignant; and it was judged that his religion and wealth,
rather than the crime alleged against him, had been the cause of his
condemnation.

"Felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror
and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of
the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him, and
then looked around for the means. After many fruitless attempts to
gain admittance to the prison, he found a strongly grated window in an
unguarded part of the building which lighted the dungeon of the
unfortunate Mahometan; who, loaded with chains, waited in despair
the execution of the barbarous sentence. Felix visited the grate at
night, and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour.
The Turk, amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of
his deliverer by promises of reward and wealth. Felix rejected his
offers with contempt; yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who was
allowed to visit her father, and who, by her gestures, expressed her
lively gratitude, the youth could not help owning to his own mind that
the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward his toil and
hazard.

"The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had
made on the heart of Felix, and endeavoured to secure him more
entirely in his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage, so
soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too
delicate to accept this offer; yet he looked forward to the
probability of the event as to the consummation of his happiness.

"During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going
forward for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed
by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found
means to express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the
aid of an old man, a servant of her father, who understood French. She
thanked him in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards
her parent; and at the same time deeply deplored her own fate.

"I have copies of these letters; for I found means, during my
residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and
the letters were often in the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I
depart, I will give them to you, they will prove the truth of my tale;
but at present, as the sun is already far declined, I shall only
have time to repeat the substance of them to you.

"Safie related that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and
made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won
the heart of the father of Safie, who married her. The young girl
spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in
freedom, spumed the bondage to which she was now reduced. She
instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion, and taught
her to aspire to higher powers of intellect, and an independence of
spirit, forbidden to the female followers of Mahomet. This lady
died; but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of Safie,
who sickened at the prospect of again returning to Asia and being
immured within the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself
with infantile amusements, ill suited to the temper of her soul, now
accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue. The
prospect of marrying a Christian, and remaining in a country where
women were allowed to take a rank in society, was enchanting to her.

"The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed; but, on the
night previous to it, he quitted his prison, and before morning was
distant many leagues from Paris. Felix had procured passports in the
name of his father, sister, and himself. He had previously
communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by
quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey, and concealed
himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris.

"Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons, and across
Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a
favourable opportunity of passing into some part of the Turkish
dominions.

"Safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of
his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she
should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in
expectation of that event; and in the meantime he enjoyed the
society of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and
tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means
of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and
Safie sang to him the divine airs of her native country.

"The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place, and encouraged
the hopes of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far
other plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to
a Christian; but he feared the resentment of Felix, if he should
appear luke-warm; for he knew that he was still in the power of his
deliverer, if he should choose to betray him to the Italian state
which they inhabited. He revolved a thousand plans by which he
should be enabled to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer
necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when he
departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from
Paris.

"The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of
their victim, and spared no pains to detect and punish his
deliverer. The plot of Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacey
and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix, and roused
him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father, and his
gentle sister, lay in a noisome dungeon, while he enjoyed the free air
and the society of her whom he loved. This idea was torture to him. He
quickly arranged with the Turks that if the latter should find a
favourable opportunity for escape before Felix could return to
Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder at a convent at Leghorn; and
then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to Paris, and delivered
himself up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and
Agatha by this proceeding.

"He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before
the trial took place; the result of which deprived them of their
fortune, and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native
country.

"They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany where I
discovered them. Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk, for
whom he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on
discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin,
became a traitor to good feeling and honour, and had quitted Italy
with his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money, to
aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.

"Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix, and
rendered him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of his
family. He could have endured poverty; and while this distress had
been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it: but the ingratitude
of the Turk, and the loss of his beloved Safie, were misfortunes
more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of the Arabian now infused
new life into his soul.

"When the news reached Leghorn that Felix was deprived of his
wealth and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no
more of her lover, but to prepare to return to her native country. The
generous nature of Safie was outraged by this command; she attempted
to expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating
his tyrannical mandate.

"A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter's apartment,
and told her hastily that he had reason to believe that his
residence at Leghorn had been divulged, and that he should speedily be
delivered up to the French government; he had, consequently, hired a
vessel to convey him to Constantinople, for which city he should
sail in a few hours. He intended to leave his daughter under the
care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the
greater part of his property, which had not yet arrived at Leghorn.

"When alone, Safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct
that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in
Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were
alike adverse to it. By some papers of her father, which fell into her
hands, she heard of the exile of her lover, and learnt the name of the
spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at length she
formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to
her, and a sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant, a native
of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey, and
departed for Germany.

"She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the
cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. Safie
nursed her with the most devoted affection; but the poor girl died,
and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of
the country, and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. She
fell, however, into good hands. The Italian had mentioned the name
of the spot for which they were bound and, after her death, the
woman of the house in which they had lived took care that Safie should
arrive in safety at the cottage of her lover."

CHAPTER XV

"SUCH was the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me
deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed,
to admire their virtues, and to deprecate the vices of mankind.

"As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil; benevolence and
generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to
become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities
were called forth and displayed. But, in giving an account of the
progress of my intellect, I must not omit a circumstance which
occurred in the beginning of the month of August of the same year.

"One night, during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood,
where I collected my own food, and brought home firing for my
protectors, I found on the ground a leathern portmanteau, containing
several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the
prize, and returned with it to my hovel. Fortunately the books were
written in the language the elements of which I had acquired at the
cottage; they consisted of Paradise Lost, a volume of Plutarch's
Lives, and the Sorrows of Werter. The possession of these treasures
gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my
mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were employed in their
ordinary occupations.

"I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. They
produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings that sometimes
raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest
dejection. In the Sorrows of Werter, besides the interest of its
simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed, and so
many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects,
that I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and
astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners it described, combined
with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object
something out of self, accorded well with my experience among my
protectors, and with the wants which were for ever alive in my own
bosom. But I thought Werter himself a more divine being than I had
ever beheld or imagined; his character contained no pretension, but it
sunk deep. The disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated to
fill me with wonder. I did not pretend to enter into the merits of the
case, yet I inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose
extinction I wept, without precisely understanding it.

"As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own
feelings and condition. I found myself similar, yet at the same time
strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read, and to whose
conversation I was a listener. I sympathised with, and partly
understood them, but I was unformed in mind; I was dependent on none
and related to none. 'The path of my departure was free'; and there
was none to lament my annihilation. My person was hideous and my
stature gigantic. What did this mean? Who was I? What was I? Whence
did I come? What was my destination? These questions continually
recurred, but I was unable to solve them.

"The volume of Plutarch's Lives, which I possessed, contained
the histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. This
book had a far different effect upon me from the Sorrows of Werter.
I learned from Werter's imaginations despondency and gloom: but
Plutarch taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched
sphere of my own reflections to admire and love the heroes of past
ages. Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience.
I had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of
country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas. But I was perfectly
unacquainted with towns, and large assemblages of men. The cottage
of my protectors had been the only school in which I had studied human
nature; but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action. I
read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their
species. I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and
abhorrence for vice, as far as I understood the signification of those
terms, relative as they were, as I applied them, to pleasure and
pain alone. Induced by these feelings, I was of course led to admire
peaceable lawgivers, Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus, in preference to
Romulus and Theseus. The patriarchal lives of my protectors caused
these impressions to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first
introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier, burning for
glory and slaughter, I should have been imbued with different
sensations.

"But Paradise Lost excited different and far deeper emotions. I
read it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my
hands, as a true history. It moved every feeling of wonder and awe
that the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was
capable of exciting. I often referred the several situations, as their
similarity struck me, to my own. Like Adam, I was apparently united by
no link to any other being in existence; but his state was far
different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the
hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by
the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to converse with, and
acquire knowledge from, beings of a superior nature: but I was
wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the
fitter emblem of my condition; for often, like him, when I viewed
the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me.

"Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings.
Soon after my arrival in the hovel, I discovered some papers in the
pocket of the dress which I had taken from your laboratory. At first I
had neglected them; but now that I was able to decipher the characters
in which they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It
was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You
minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress
of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic
occurrences. You, doubtless, recollect these papers. Here they are.
Everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my
odious and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your
own horrors and rendered mine indelible. I sickened as I read.
'Hateful day when I received life!' I exclaimed in agony. 'Accursed
creator! Why did you form a monster so hideous that even you turned
from me in disgust? God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring,
after his own image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more
horrid even from the very resemblance. Satan had his companions,
fellow-devils, to admire and encourage him; but I am solitary and
abhorred.'

"These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and
solitude; but when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers,
their amiable and benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that
when they should become acquainted with my admiration of their
virtues, they would compassionate me, and overlook my personal
deformity. Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who
solicited their compassion and friendship? I resolved, at least not to
despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with them
which would decide my fate. I postponed this attempt for some months
longer; for the importance attached to its success inspired me with
a dread lest I should fail. Besides, I found that my understanding
improved so much with every day's experience that I was unwilling to
commence this undertaking until a few more months should have added to
my sagacity.

"Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage.
The presence of Safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants; and
I also found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there. Felix
and Agatha spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were
assisted in their labours by servants. They did not appear rich, but
they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and
peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous. Increase of
knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I
was. I cherished hope, it is true; but it vanished when I beheld my
person reflected in water, or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that
frail image and that inconstant shade.

"I endeavoured to crush these fears, and to fortify myself for the
trial which in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I
allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of
Paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising
with my feelings, and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances
breathed smiles of consolation. But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed
my sorrows, nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. I remembered Adam's
supplication to his Creator. But where was mine? He had abandoned
me: and, in the bitterness of my heart, I cursed him.

"Autumn passed thus. I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves
decay and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak
appearance it had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely
moon. Yet I did not heed the bleakness of the weather; I was better
fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But
my chief delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all
the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with
more attention towards the cottagers. Their happiness was not
decreased by the absence of summer. They loved, and sympathised with
one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not
interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more
I saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim their
protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known and loved by
these amiable creatures: to see their sweet looks directed towards
me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not
think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror. The
poor that stopped at their door were never driven away. I asked, it is
true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest: I required
kindness and sympathy; but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy
of it.

"The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons
had taken place since I awoke into life. My attention, at this time,
was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the
cottage of my protectors. I revolved many projects; but that on
which I finally fixed was, to enter the dwelling when the blind old
man should be alone. I had sagacity enough to discover that the
unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror with
those who had formerly beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had
nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that if, in the
absence of his children, I could gain the good-will and mediation of
the old De Lacey, I might, by his means, be tolerated by my younger
protectors.

"One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the
ground, and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie,
Agatha, and Felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at
his own desire, was left alone in the cottage. When his children had
departed, he took up his guitar, and played several mournful but sweet
airs, more sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before.
At first his countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but, as he
continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying
aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.

"My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial
which would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were
gone to a neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the cottage:
it was an excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to execute my
plan, my limbs failed me, and I sank to the ground. Again I rose; and,
exerting all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks
which I had placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. The fresh
air revived me, and, with renewed determination, I approached the door
of their cottage.

"I knocked. 'Who is there?' said the old man- 'Come in.'

"I entered; 'Pardon this intrusion,' said I: 'I am a traveller
in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would
allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.'

"'Enter,' said De Lacey; 'and I will try to relieve your wants;
but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and, as I am blind, I
am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.'

"'Do not trouble yourself, my kind host, I have food; it is warmth
and rest only that I need.'

"I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute was
precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence
the interview; when the old man addressed me-

"'By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman- are
you French?'

"'No; but I was educated by a French family, and understand that
language only. I am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.'

"'Are they Germans?'

"'No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am an
unfortunate and deserted creature; I look around, and I have no
relation or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I go
have never seen me, and know little of me. I am full of fears; for
if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world for ever.'

"'Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate;
but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest,
are full of brotherly love and charity. Rely, therefore, on your
hopes; and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.'

"'They are kind- they are the most excellent creatures in the
world; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have good
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless, and in some degree
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a
detestable monster.'

"'That is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless,
cannot you undeceive them?'

"'I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account
that I feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly love these
friends; I have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits
of daily kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure
them, and it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.'

"'Where do these friends reside?'

"'Near this spot.'

"The old man paused, and then continued, 'If you will unreservedly
confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in
undeceiving them. I am blind, and cannot judge of your countenance,
but there is something in your words which persuades me that you are
sincere. I am poor, and an exile; but it will afford me true
pleasure to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.'

"'Excellent man! I thank you, and accept your generous offer.
You raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your
aid, I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your
fellow-creatures.'

"'Heaven forbid! even if you were really criminal; for that can
only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I also
am unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although
innocent: judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.'

"'How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor? From your lips
first have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I
shall be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of
success with those friends whom I am on the point of meeting.'

"'May I know the names and residence of those friends?'

"I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which
was to rob me of, or bestow happiness on me forever. I struggled
vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed
all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair, and sobbed aloud. At
that moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors. I had not a
moment to lose; but, seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, 'Now is
the time!- save and protect me! You and your family are the friends
whom I seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!'

"'Great God!' exclaimed the old man, 'who are you?'

"At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie,
and Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on
beholding me? Agatha fainted; and Safie, unable to attend to her
friend, rushed out of the cottage. Felix darted forward, and with
supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung: in
a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me
violently with a stick. I could have torn him limb from limb, as a
lion rends the antelope. But my heart sunk within me as with bitter
sickness, and I refrained. I saw him on the point of repeating his
blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage and in
the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.

CHAPTER XVI

"CURSED, cursed creator! Why did I live? Why, in that instant, did
I not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
feelings were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure have
destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants, and have glutted myself
with their shrieks and misery.

"When night came, I quitted my retreat, and wandered in the
wood; and now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I gave
vent to my anguish in fearful howlings. I was like a wild beast that
had broken the toils; destroying the objects that obstructed me, and
ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. O! what a
miserable night I passed! the cold stars shone in mockery, and the
bare trees waved their branches above me: now and then the sweet voice
of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All, save I,
were at rest or in enjoyment: I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell
within me; and, finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up
the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and then to have
sat down and enjoyed the ruin.

"But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I
became fatigued with excess of bodily exertion, and sank on the damp
grass in the sick impotence of despair. There was none among the
myriads of men that existed who would pity or assist me; and should
I feel kindness towards my enemies? No: from that moment I declared
everlasting war against the species, and, more than all, against him
who had formed me, and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.

"The sun rose; I heard the voices of men, and knew that it was
impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I
hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the
ensuing hours to reflection on my situation.

"The pleasant sunshine, and the pure air of day, restored me to
some degree of tranquillity; and when I considered what had passed
at the cottage, I could not help believing that I had been too hasty
in my conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently. It was
apparent that my conversation had interested the father in my
behalf, and I was a fool in having exposed my person to the horror
of his children. I ought to have familiarised the old De Lacey to
me, and by degrees to have discovered myself to the rest of his
family, when they should have been prepared for my approach. But I did
not believe my errors to be irretrievable; and, after much
consideration, I resolved to return to the cottage, seek the old
man, and by my representations win him to my party.

"These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon I sank into a
profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be
visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day
was forever acting before my eyes; the females were flying, and the
enraged Felix tearing me from his father's feet. I awoke exhausted;
and, finding that it was already night, I crept forth from my hiding
place, and went in search of food.

"When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the
well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace.
I crept into my hovel, and remained in silent expectation of the
accustomed hour when the family arose. That hour passed, the sun
mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I
trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The
inside of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot
describe the agony of this suspense.

"Presently two countrymen passed by; but, pausing near the
cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations;
but I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of
the country, which differed from that of my protectors. Soon after,
however, Felix approached with another man: I was surprised, as I knew
that he had not quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously
to discover, from his discourse, the meaning of these unusual
appearances.

"'Do you consider,' said his companion to him, 'that you will be
obliged to pay three months' rent, and to lose the produce of your
garden? I do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and I beg
therefore that you will take some days to consider of your
determination.'

"'It is utterly useless,' replied Felix; 'we can never again
inhabit your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest danger,
owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have related. My wife and my
sister will never recover their horror. I entreat you not to reason
with me any more. Take possession of your tenement, and let me fly
from this place.'

"Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion
entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and
then departed. I never saw any of the family of De Lacey more.

"I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state
of utter and stupid despair. My protectors had departed, and had
broken the only link that held me to the world. For the first time the
feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive
to control them; but, allowing myself to be borne away by the
stream, I bent my mind towards injury and death. When I thought of
my friends, of the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle eyes of
Agatha, and the exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts
vanished, and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me. But again, when I
reflected that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a
rage of anger; and, unable to injure anything human, I turned my
fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a
variety of combustibles around the cottage; and, after having
destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, I waited with
forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my operations.

"As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods, and
quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens: the
blast tore along like a mighty avalanche, and produced a kind of
insanity in my spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection.
I lighted the dry branch of a tree, and danced with fury around the
devoted cottage, my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the
edge of which the moon nearly touched. A part of its orb was at length
hid, and I waved my brand; it sunk, and with a loud scream, I fired
the straw, and heath, and bushes, which I had collected. The wind
fanned the fire, and the cottage was quickly enveloped by the
flames, which clung to it, and licked it with their forked and
destroying tongues.

"As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part
of the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the
woods.

"And now, with the world before me, whither should I bend my
steps? I resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but
to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible.
At length the thought of you crossed my mind. I learned from your
papers that you were my father, my creator; and to whom could I
apply with more fitness than to him who had given me life? Among the
lessons that Felix had bestowed upon Safie, geography had not been
omitted. I had learned from these the relative situations of the
different countries of the earth. You had mentioned Geneva as the name
of your native town; and towards this place I resolved to proceed.

"But how was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a
south-westerly direction to reach my destination; but the sun was my
only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass
through, nor could I ask information from a single human being; but
I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although
towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling,
heartless creator! you had endowed me with perceptions and passions,
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I
determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain
from any other being that wore the human form.

"My travels were long, and the sufferings I endured intense. It
was late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long
resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage
of a human being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun became
heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen;
the surface of the earth was hard, and chill, and bare, and I found no
shelter. Oh, earth! how often did I imprecate curses on the cause of
my being! the mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was
turned to gall and bitterness. The nearer I approached to your
habitation, the more deeply did I feel the spirit of revenge enkindled
in my heart. Snow fell, and the waters were hardened; but I rested
not. A few incidents now and then directed me, and I possessed a map
of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of
my feelings allowed me no respite: no incident occurred from which
my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a circumstance that
happened when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun
had recovered its warmth, and the earth again began to look green,
confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of my
feelings.

"I generally rested during the day, and travelled only when I
was secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however,
finding that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue
my journey after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the
first of spring, cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and
the balminess of the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and
pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half
surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be
borne away by them; and, forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared
to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised
my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun which bestowed
such joy upon me.

"I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came
to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into
which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the
fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to
pursue, when I heard the sound of voices that induced me to conceal
myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid, when a
young girl came running towards the spot where I was concealed,
laughing, as if she ran from some one in sport. She continued her
course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her
foot slipt, and she fell into the rapid stream. I rushed from my
hiding-place; and, with extreme labour from the force of the
current, saved her, and dragged her to shore. She was senseless; and I
endeavoured by every means in my power to restore animation, when I
was suddenly interrupted by the approach of rustic, who was probably
the person from whom she had playfully fled. On seeing me, he darted
towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms, hastened towards the
deeper parts of the wood. I followed speedily, hardly knew why; but
when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun, which he carried, at my
body, and fired. I sunk to the ground, and my injurer, with
increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.

"This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human
being from destruction, and as a recompense, I now writhed under the
miserable pain of a wound, which shattered the flesh and bone. The
feelings of kindness and gentleness which I had entertained but a
few moments before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth.
Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind.
But the agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I
fainted.

"For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods,
endeavouring to cure the wound which I had received. The ball had
entered my shoulder, and I knew not whether it had remained there or
passed through; at any rate I had no means of extracting it. My
sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of the
injustice and ingratitude of their infliction. My daily vows rose
for revenge- a deep and deadly revenge, such as would alone compensate
for the outrages and anguish I had endured.

"After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The
labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery, which insulted my
desolate state, and made me feel more painfully that I was not made
for the enjoyment of pleasure.

"But my toils now drew near a close; and in two months from this
time I reached the environs of Geneva.

"It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place
among the fields that surround it, to meditate in what manner I should
apply to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger, and far too
unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes of evening, or the prospect of the
sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of Jura.

"At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of
reflection, which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful
child, who came running into the recess I had chosen, with all the
sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized
me, that this little creature was unprejudiced, and had lived too
short a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I
could seize him, and educate him as my companion and friend, I
should not be so desolate in this peopled earth.

"Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed and
drew him towards me. As soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands
before his eyes and uttered a shrill scream: I drew his hand
forcibly from his face, and said, 'Child, what is the meaning of this?
I do not intend to hurt you; listen to me.'

"He struggled violently. 'Let me go,' he cried; 'monster! ugly
wretch! you wish to eat me, and tear me to pieces- You are an ogre-
Let me go, or I will tell my papa.'

"'Boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with
me.'

"'Hideous monster! let me go. My papa is a Syndic- he is M.
Frankenstein- he will punish you. You dare not keep me.'

"'Frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy- to him towards whom I
have sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.'

"The child still struggled, and loaded me with epithets which
carried despair to my heart; I grasped his throat to silence him,
and in a moment he lay dead at my feet.

"I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and
hellish triumph: clapping my hands, I exclaimed, 'I, too, can create
desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry
despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment and
destroy him.'

"As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on
his breast. I took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In
spite of malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a few moments
I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
lovely lips; but presently my rage returned: I remembered that I was
for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures
could bestow; and that she whose resemblance I contemplated would,
in regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
expressive of disgust and affright.

"Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? I
only wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the
attempt to destroy them.

"While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot where I
had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place,
I entered a barn which had appeared to me to be empty. A woman was
sleeping on some straw; she was young: not indeed so beautiful as
her whose portrait I held; but of an agreeable aspect, and blooming in
the loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of those
whose joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. And then I bent
over her, and whispered, 'Awake, fairest, thy lover is near- he who
would give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine
eyes: my beloved, awake!'

"The sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me. Should
she indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer?
Thus would she assuredly act, if her darkened eyes opened and she
beheld me. The thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me-
not I, but she shall suffer: the murder I have committed because I
am forever robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone.
The crime had its source in her: be hers the punishment! Thanks to the
lessons of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned now
to work mischief I bent over her, and placed the portrait securely
in one of the folds of her dress. She moved again, and I fled.

"For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken
place; sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the
world and its miseries forever. At length I wandered towards these
mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by
a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until
you have promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone, and
miserable; man will not associate with me; but one as deformed and
horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My companion must
be of the same species, and have the same defects. This being you must
create."

CHAPTER XVII

THE BEING finished speaking, and fixed his looks upon me in
expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
proposition. He continued:

"You must create a female for me, with whom I can live in the
interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. This you alone
can do; and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to
concede."

The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger
that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the
cottagers, and, as he said this, I could no longer suppress the rage
that burned within me.

"I do refuse it," I replied; "and no torture shall ever extort a
consent from me. You may render me the most miserable of men, but
you shall never make me base in my own eyes. Shall I create another
like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world!
Begone! I have answered you; you may torture me, but I will never
consent."

"You are in the wrong," replied the fiend; "and, instead of
threatening, I am content to reason with you. I am malicious because I
am miserable. Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind? You, my
creator, would tear me to pieces, and triumph; remember that, and tell
me why I should pity man more than he pities me? You would not call it
murder if you could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts, and
destroy my frame, the work of your own hands. Shall I respect man when
he contemns me? Let him live with me in the interchange of kindness;
and, instead of injury, I would bestow every benefit upon him with
tears of gratitude at his acceptance. But that cannot be; the human
senses are insurmountable barriers to our union. Yet mine shall not be
the submission of abject slavery. I will revenge my injuries: if I
cannot inspire love, I will cause fear; and chiefly towards you my
arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred.
Have a care: I will work at your destruction, nor finish until I
desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of your birth."

A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was
wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but
presently he calmed himself and proceeded-

"I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me; for
you do not reflect that you are the cause of its excess. If any
being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, should return them an
hundred and an hundred fold; for that one creature's sake, I would
make peace with the whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss
that cannot be realised. What I ask of is reasonable and moderate; I
demand a creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself; the
gratification is small, but it is all that I can receive, and it shall
content me. It is true we shall be monsters, cut off from all the
world; but on that account we shall be more attached to one another.
Our lives will not be happy, but they will be harmless, and free
from the misery I now feel. Oh! my creator, make me happy; let me feel
gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see that I excite the
sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request!"

I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible
consequences of my consent; but I felt that there was some justice
in his argument. His tale, and the feelings he now expressed, proved
him to be a creature of fine sensations; and did I not as his maker
owe him all the portion of happiness that it was in my power to
bestow? He saw my change of feeling and continued-

"If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall
ever see us again: I will go to the vast wilds of South America. My
food is not that of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut
my appetite; acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My
companion will be of the same nature as myself, and will be content
with the same fare. We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun
will shine on us as on man, and will ripen our food. The picture I
present to you is peaceful and human, and you must feel that you could
deny it only in the wantonness of power and cruelty. Pitiless as you
have been towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; me seize
the favourable moment, and persuade you to promise what. I so ardently
desire."

"You propose," replied I, "to fly from the habitations of man,
to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
only companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of
man, persevere in this exile? You will return, and again seek their
kindness, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions
will be renewed, and you will then have a companion to aid you in
the task of destruction. This may not be: cease to argue the point,
for I cannot consent."

"How inconstant are your feelings! but a moment ago you were moved
by my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my
complaints? I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you
that made me, that, with the companion you bestow, I will quit the
neighbourhood of man, and dwell as it may chance in the most savage of
places. My evil passions will have fled, for I shall meet with
sympathy! my life will flow quietly away, and, in my dying moments,
I shall not curse my maker."

His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated him,
and sometimes felt a wish to console him; but when I looked upon
him, when I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart
sickened, and my feelings were altered to those of horror and
hatred. I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that, as I could
not sympathise with him, I had no right to withhold from him the small
portion of happiness which was yet in my power to bestow.

"You swear", I said, "to be harmless; but have you not already
shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust
you? May not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by
affording a wider scope for your revenge."

"How is this? I must not be trifled with: and I demand an
answer. If I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be
my portion; the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes,
and I shall become a thing of whose existence every one will be
ignorant. My vices are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor;
and my virtues will necessarily arise when I live in communion with an
equal. I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being, and become
linked to the chain of existence and events, from which I am now
excluded."

I paused some time to reflect on all he had related, and the
various arguments which he had employed. I thought of the promise of
virtues which he had displayed on the opening of his existence, and
the subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and
scorn which his protectors had manifested towards him. His power and
threats were not omitted in my calculations: a creature who could
exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers, and hide himself from
pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices, was a being
possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. After a long pause
of reflection, I concluded that the justice due both to him and my
fellow-creatures demanded of me that I should comply with his request.
Turning to him, therefore, I said-

"I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe
for ever, and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon
as I shall deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you
in your exile."

"I swear," he cried, "by the sun, and by the blue sky of Heaven,
and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. Depart to
your home, and commence your labours: I shall watch their progress
with unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready I
shall appear."

Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any
change in my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with greater
speed than the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the
undulations of the sea of ice.

His tale had occupied the whole day; and the sun was upon the
verge of the horizon when he departed. I knew that I ought to hasten
my descent towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in
darkness; but my heart was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of
winding among the little paths of the mountains, and fixing my feet
firmly as I advanced, perplexed me, occupied as I was by the
emotions which the occurrences of the day had produced. Night was
far advanced when I came to the half-way resting-place, and seated
myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals, as the
clouds passed from over them the dark pines rose before me, and
every here and there a broken tree lay on the ground: it was a scene
of wonderful solemnity, and stirred strange thoughts within me. I wept
bitterly; and clasping my hands in agony, I exclaimed, "Oh! stars, and
clouds, and winds, ye are all about to mock me: if ye really pity
me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not,
depart, leave me in darkness."

These were wild and miserable thoughts; but I cannot describe to
you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me, and how
I listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on
its way to consume me.

Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; I
took no rest, but returned immediately to Geneva. Even in my own heart
I could give no expression to my sensations- they weighed on me with a
mountain's weight, and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to
the family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm; but
I answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if I were
placed under a ban- as if I had no right to claim their sympathies- as
if never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet even thus I
loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate
myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of such an occupation
made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a
dream; and that thought only had to me the reality of life.

CHAPTER XVIII

DAY after day, week after week, passed away on my return to
Geneva; and I could not collect the courage to recommence my work. I
feared the vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unable to
overcome my repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. I found that
I could not compose a female without again devoting several months
to profound study and laborious disquisition. I had heard of some
discoveries having been made by an English philosopher, the
knowledge of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought
of obtaining my father's consent to visit England for this purpose;
but I clung to every pretence of delay, and shrunk from taking the
first step in an undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear
less absolute to me. A change indeed had taken place in me: my health,
which had hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits,
when unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose
proportionably. My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned
his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of
my melancholy, which every now and then would return by fits, and with
a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these
moments I took refuge in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole
days on the lake alone in a little boat, watching the clouds, and
listening to the rippling of the waves, silent and listless. But the
fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of
composure; and, on my return, I met the salutations of my friends with
a readier smile and a more cheerful heart.

It was after my return from one of these rambles, that my
father, calling me aside, thus addressed me:-

"I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your
former pleasures, and seem to be returning to yourself. And yet you
are still unhappy, and still avoid our society. For some time I was
lost in conjecture as to the cause of this; but yesterday an idea
struck me, and if it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it.
Reserve on such a point would be not only useless, but draw down
treble misery on us all."

I trembled violently at this exordium, and my father continued:

"I confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your
marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort,
and the stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other
from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in
dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. But so
blind is the experience of man that what I conceived to be the best
assistants to my plan may have entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps,
regard her as your sister, without any wish that she might become your
wife. Nay, you may have met with another whom you may love; and,
considering yourself as bound in honour to Elizabeth, this struggle
may occasion the poignant misery which you appear to feel."

"My dear father, reassure yourself I love my cousin tenderly and
sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my
warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are
entirely bound up in the expectation of our union."

"The expression of your sentiments on this subject, my dear
Victor, gives me more pleasure than I have for some time
experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however
present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is this gloom, which
appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind, that I wish to
dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate
solemnisation of the marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent
events have drawn us from that every-day tranquillity befitting my
years and infirmities. You are younger; yet I do not suppose,
possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage
would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and utility
that you may have formed. Do not suppose, however, that I wish to
dictate happiness to you, or that a delay on your part would cause
me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour, and answer
me, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity."

I listened to my father in silence, and remained for some time
incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind a
multitude of thoughts, and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion.
Alas! to me the idea of an immediate union with my Elizabeth was one
of horror and dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise, which I had not
yet fulfilled, and dared not break; or, if I did, what manifold
miseries might not impend over me and my devoted family! Could I enter
into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck, and
bowing me to the ground? I must perform my engagement and let the
monster depart with his mate, before I allowed myself to enjoy the
delight of an union from which I expected peace.

I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either
journeying to England, or entering into a long correspondence with
those philosophers of that country, whose knowledge and discoveries
were of indispensable use to me in my present undertaking. The
latter method of obtaining the desired intelligence was dilatory and
unsatisfactory: besides, I had an insurmountable aversion to the
idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father's house,
while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved. I knew
that a thousand fearful accidents might occur, the slightest of
which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected with me with
horror. I was aware also that I should often lose all self-command,
all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess
me during the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent
myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it
would quickly be achieved, and I might be restored to my family in
peace and happiness. My promise fulfilled, the monster would depart
forever. Or (so my fond fancy imaged) some accident might meanwhile
occur to destroy him, and put an end to my slavery for ever.

These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed a wish
to visit England; but, concealing the true reasons of this request,
I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I
urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
comply. After so long a period of an absorbing melancholy, that
resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find
that I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey,
and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before
my return, have restored me entirely to myself.

The duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few
months, or at most a year, was the period contemplated. One paternal
kind precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion.
Without previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with
Elizabeth, arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This
interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task;
yet at the commencement of my journey the presence of my friend
could in no way be an impediment, and truly I rejoiced that thus I
should be saved many hours of lonely, maddening reflection. Nay, Henry
might stand between me and the intrusion of my foe. If I were alone,
would he not at times force his abhorred presence on me, to remind
me of my task, or to contemplate its progress?

To England, therefore, I was bound, and it was understood that
my union with Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. My
father's age rendered him extremely averse to delay. For myself, there
was one reward I promised myself from my detested toils- one
consolation for my unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of
that day when, enfranchised from my miserable slavery, I might claim
Elizabeth, and forget the past in my union with her.

I now made arrangements for my journey; but one feeling haunted
me, which filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I
should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy,
and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my
departure. But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go; and
would he not accompany me to England? This imagination was dreadful in
itself, but soothing, inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my
friends. I was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the
reverse of this might happen. But through the whole period during
which I was the slave of my creature, I allowed myself to be
governed by the impulses of the moment; and my present sensations
strongly intimated that the fiend would follow me, and exempt my
family from the danger of his machinations.

It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted my
native country. My journey had been my own suggestion, and
Elizabeth, therefore, acquiesced: but she was filled with disquiet
at the idea of my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery
and grief. It had been her care which provided me a companion in
Clerval- and yet a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances,
which call forth a woman's sedulous attention. She longed to bid me
hasten my return,- a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute
as she bade me a tearful silent farewell.

I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away,
hardly knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was passing
around. I remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I
reflected on it, to order that my chemical instruments should be
packed to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed
through many beautiful and majestic scenes; but my eyes were fixed and
unobserving. I could only think of the bourne of my travels, and the
work which was to occupy me whilst they endured.

After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I
traversed many leagues, I arrived at Strasburgh, where I waited two
days for Clerval. He came. Alas, how great was the contrast between
us! He was alive to every new scene; joyful when he saw the beauties
of the setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise, and
recommence a new day. He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the
landscape, and the appearances of the sky. "This is what it is to
live," he cried, "now I enjoy existence! But you, Frankenstein,
wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful!" In truth, I was
occupied by gloomy thoughts, and neither saw the descent of the
evening star, nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine.- And you,
my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who
observed the scenery with an eye of feeling and delight, than in
listening to my reflections. I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse
that shut up every avenue to enjoyment.

We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburgh to
Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this
voyage, we passed many willowy islands, and saw several beautiful
towns. We stayed a day at Manheim, and, on the fifth from our
departure from Strasburgh, arrived at Mayence. The course of the Rhine
below Mayence becomes much more picturesque. The river descends
rapidly, and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of
beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of
precipices, surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible. This
part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a singularly variegated landscape.
In one spot you view rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking
tremendous precipices, with the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and, on
the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards, with green
sloping banks, and a meandering river, and populous towns occupy the
scene.

We travelled at the time of the vintage, and heard the song of the
labourers, as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind,
and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was
pleased. I lay at the bottom of the boat, and, as I gazed on the
cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had
long been a stranger. And if these were my sensations, who can
describe those of Henry? He felt as if he had been transported to
Fairyland, and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. "I have
seen," he said, "the most beautiful scenes of my own country; I have
visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy mountains
descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black and
impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful
appearance, were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve
the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen this lake agitated by a
tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water, and gave you an
idea of what the waterspout must be on the great ocean; and the
waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and
his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche, and where their dying
voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind;
I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud: but this
country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains
of Switzerland are more majestic and strange; but there is a charm
in the banks of this divine river, that I never before saw equalled.
Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on
the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely
trees; and now that group of labourers coming from among their
vines; and that village half hid in the recess of the mountain. Oh,
surely, the spirit that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more
in harmony with man than those who pile the glacier, or retire to
the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of our own country."

Clerval! beloved friend! even now it delights me to record your
words; and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently
deserving. He was a being formed in the "very poetry of nature." His
wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility
of his heart. His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his
friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the
worldy-minded teach us to look for only in the imagination. But even
human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind. The
scenery of external nature, which others regard only with
admiration, he loved with ardour:-

"The sounding cataract

Haunted him like a passion: the tall rock,

The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,

Their colours and their forms, were then to him

An appetite; a feeling, and a love,

That had no need of a remoter charm,

By thought supplied, or any interest

Unborrow'd from the eye."*

* Wordsworth's Tintern Abbey.

And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being
lost forever? Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations
fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence
depended on the life of its creator;- has the mind perished? Does it
now only exist in my memory? No, it is not thus; your form so divinely
wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still
visits and consoles your unhappy friend.

Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a
slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my
heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I
will proceed with my tale.

Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland; and we
resolved to post the remainder of our way; for the wind was
contrary, and the stream of the river was too gentle to aid us.

Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery;
but we arrived in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by
sea to England. It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of
October, that I first saw the white cliffs of Britain. The banks of
the Thames presented a new scene; they were flat, but fertile, and
almost every town was marked by the remembrance of some story. We
saw Tilbury Fort, and remembered the Spanish armada; Gravesend,
Woolwich, and Greenwich, places which I had heard of even in my
country.

At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul's
towering above all, and the Tower famed in English history.

CHAPTER XIX

LONDON was our present point of rest; we determined to remain
several months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Clerval
desired the intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished
at this time; but this was with me a secondary object; I was
principally occupied with the means of obtaining the information
necessary for the completion of my promise, and quickly availed myself
of the letters of introduction that I had brought with me, addressed
to the most distinguished natural philosophers.

If this journey had taken place during my days of study and
happiness, it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a
blight had come over my existence, and I only visited these people for
the sake of the information they might give me on the subject in which
my interest was so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me;
when alone, I could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and
earth; the voice of Henry soothed me, and I could thus cheat myself
into a transitory peace. But busy uninteresting joyous faces brought
back despair to my heart. I saw an insurmountable barrier placed
between me and my fellow-men this barrier was sealed with the blood of
William and Justine; and to reflect on the events connected with those
names filled my soul with anguish.

But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was
inquisitive, and anxious to gain experience and instruction. The
difference of manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible
source of instruction and amusement. He was also pursuing an object he
had long had in view. His design was to visit India, in the belief
that he had in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the
views he had taken of its society, the means of materially assisting
the progress of European colonisation and trade. In Britain only could
he further the execution of his plan. He was for ever busy; and the
only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I
tried to conceal this as much as possible, that I might not debar
him from the pleasures natural to one who was entering on a new
scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection. I often
refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might
remain alone. I now also began to collect the materials necessary
for my new creation, and this was to me like the torture of single
drops of water continually falling on the head. Every thought that was
devoted to it was an extreme anguish, and every word that I spoke in
allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.

After passing some months in London, we received a letter from a
person in Scotland, who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva. He
mentioned the beauties of his native country, and asked us if those
were not sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as
far north as Perth, where he resided. Clerval eagerly desired to
accept this invitation; and I, although I abhorred society, wished
to view again mountains and streams, and all the wondrous works with
which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.

We had arrived in England at the beginning of October, and it
was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey
towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this
expedition we did not intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh,
but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes,
resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of
July. I packed up my chemical instruments, and the materials I had
collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in
the northern highlands of Scotland.

We quitted London on the 27th of March, and remained a few days at
Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a new scene to
us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the
herds of stately deer, were all novelties to us.

From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered this city, our
minds were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been
transacted there more than a century and a half before. It was here
that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained
faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join
the standard of parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate
king, and his companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring,
his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city
which they might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder
days found a dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps.
If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the
appearance of the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain
our admiration. The colleges are ancient and picturesque; the
streets are almost magnificent; and the lovely Isis, which flows
beside it through meadows of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a
placid expanse of waters, which reflects its majestic assemblage of
towers, and spires, and domes, embosomed among aged trees.

I enjoyed this scene; and yet my enjoyment was embittered both
by the memory of the past, and the anticipation of the future. I was
formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent
never visited my mind; and if I was ever overcome by ennui, the
sight of what is beautiful in nature, or the study of what is
excellent and sublime in the productions of man, could always interest
my heart, and communicate elasticity to my spirits. But I am a blasted
tree; the bolt has entered my soul; and I felt then that I should
survive to exhibit, what I shall soon cease to be- a miserable
spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to others, and intolerable
to myself.

We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its
environs, and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate
to the most animating epoch of English history. Our little voyages
of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects that
presented themselves. We visited the tomb of the illustrious
Hampden, and the field on which that patriot fell. For a moment my
soul was elevated from its debasing and miserable fears, to
contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and self-sacrifice, of which
these sights were the monuments and the remembrancers. For an
instant I dared to shake off my chains, and look around me with a free
and lofty spirit; but the iron had eaten into my flesh, and I sank
again, trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self.

We left Oxford with regret, and proceeded to Matlock, which was
our next place of rest. The country in the neighbourhood of this
village resembles, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland;
but everything is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown
of distant white Alps, which always attend on the piny mountains of my
native country. We visited the wondrous cave, and the little
cabinets of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the
same manner as in the collections at Servox and Chamounix. The
latter name made me tremble when pronounced by Henry; and I hastened
to quit Matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.

From Derby, still journeying northward, we passed two months in
Cumberland and Westmoreland. I could now almost fancy mr self among
the Swiss mountains. The little patches of snow which yet lingered
on the northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing
of the rocky streams, were all familiar and dear sights to me. Here
also we made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into
happiness. The delight of Clerval was proportionably greater than
mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and he
found in his own nature greater capacities and resources than he could
have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his
inferiors. "I could pass my life here," said he to me; "and among
these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine."

But he found that a traveller's life is one that includes much
pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are forever on the stretch;
and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to
quit that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again
engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties.

We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and
Westmoreland, and conceived an affection for some of the
inhabitants, when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend
approached, and we left them to travel on. For my own part I was not
sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, and I feared
the effects of the daemon's disappointment. He might remain in
Switzerland, and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea
pursued me, and tormented me at every moment from which I might
otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for my letters with
feverish impatience: if they were delayed, I was miserable, and
overcome by a thousand fears; and when they arrived, and I saw the
superscription of Elizabeth or my father, I hardly dared to read and
ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that the fiend followed me, and
might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these
thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Henry for a moment, but
followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of
his destroyer. I felt as if I had committed some great crime, the
consciousness of which haunted me. I was guiltless, but I had indeed
drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.

I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that
city might have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not
like it so well as Oxford: for the antiquity of the latter city was
more pleasing to him. But the beauty and regularity of the new town of
Edinburgh, its romantic castle, and its environs, the most
delightful in the world, Arthur's Seat, St. Bernard's Well, and the
Pentland Hills, compensated him for the change, and filled him with
cheerfulness and admiration. But I was impatient to arrive at the
termination of my journey.

We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew's,
and along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected
us. But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers, or enter
into their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a
guest; and accordingly I told Clerval that I wished to make the tour
of Scotland alone. "Do you," said I, "enjoy yourself, and let this
be our rendezvous. I may be absent a month or two; but do not
interfere with my motions, I entreat you: leave me to peace and
solitude for a short time; and when I return, I hope it will be with a
lighter heart, more congenial to your own temper."

Henry wished to dissuade me; but, seeing me bent on this plan,
ceased to remonstrate. He entreated me to write often. "I had rather
be with you," he said, "in your solitary rambles, than with these
Scotch people, whom I do not know: hasten then, my dear friend, to
return, that I may again feel myself somewhat at home, which I
cannot do in your absence."

Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit some remote
spot of Scotland, and finish my work in solitude. I did not doubt
but that the monster followed me, and would discover himself me when I
should have finished, that he might receive his companion.

With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands, and fixed
on one of the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene of my labours. It
was a place fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock,
whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil
was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and
oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose
gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare.
Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even
fresh water, was to be procured from the mainland, which was about
five miles distant.

On the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one
of these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two
rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable
penury. The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and
the door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be repaired, bought
some furniture, and took possession; an incident which would,
doubtless, have occasioned some surprise, had not all the senses of
the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was,
I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance
of food and clothes which I gave; so much does suffering blunt even
the coarsest sensations of men.

In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the
evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of
the sea, to listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my
feet. It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of
Switzerland; it was far different from this desolate and appalling
landscape. Its hills are covered with vines, and its cottages are
scattered thickly in the plains. Its fair lakes reflect a blue and
gentle sky; and, when troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as
the play of a lively infant, when compared to the roarings of the
giant ocean.

In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first
arrived; but, as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more
horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to
enter my laboratory for several days; and at other times I toiled
day and night in order to complete my work. It was, indeed, a filthy
process in which I was engaged. During my first experiment, a kind
of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my
employment; my mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my
labour, and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings. But now
I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of
my hands.

Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation,
immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my
attention from the actual scene in which I was engaged, my spirits
became unequal; I grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared
to meet my persecutor. Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the
ground, fearing to raise them, lest they should encounter the object
which I so much dreaded to behold. I feared to wander from the sight
of my fellow-creatures, lest when alone he should come to claim his
companion.

In the meantime I worked on, and my labour was already
considerably advanced. I looked towards its completion with a
tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not trust myself to
question, but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil,
that made my heart sicken in my bosom.

CHAPTER XX

I SAT one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the
moon was just rising from the sea; I had not sufficient light for my
employment, and I remained idle, in a pause of consideration of
whether I should leave my labour for the night, or hasten its
conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. As I sat, a train of
reflection occurred to me, which led me to consider the effects of
what I was now doing. Three years before I was engaged in the same
manner, and had created a fiend whose unparalleled barbarity had
desolated my heart, and filled it for ever with the bitterest remorse.
I was now about to form another being, of whose dispositions I was
alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant
than her mate, and delight, for its own sake, in murder and
wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man, and
hide himself in deserts; but she had not; and she, who in all
probability was to become a thinking and reasoning animal, might
refuse to comply with a compact made before her creation. They might
even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own
deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence for it
when it came before his eyes in the female form? She also might turn
with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit
him, and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of
being deserted by one of his own species.

Even if they were to leave Europe, and inhabit the deserts of
the new world, yet one of the first results of those sympathies for
which the daemon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils
would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence
of the species of man a condition precarious and full of terror. Had I
right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting
generations? I had before been moved by the sophisms of the being I
had created; I had been struck senseless by his fiendish threats:
but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my promise burst upon
me; I shuddered to think that future ages might curse me as their
pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace, at the
price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.

I trembled, and my heart failed within me; when, on looking up,
I saw, by the light of the moon, the daemon at the casement. A ghastly
grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the
task which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my
travels; he had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken
refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress,
and claim the fulfillment of my promise.

As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness on my
promise to create another like him, and trembling with passion, tore
to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me
destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for
happiness, and, with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.

I left the room, and, locking the door, made a solemn vow in my
own heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling
steps, sought my own apartment. I was alone; none were near me to
dissipate the gloom, and relieve me from the sickening oppression of
the most terrible reveries.

Several hours passed, and I remained near my window gazing on
the sea; it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and
all nature reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. A few fishing
vessels alone specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze
wafted the sound of voices, as the fishermen called to one another.
I felt the silence, although I was hardly conscious of its extreme
profundity, until my ear was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars
near the shore, and a person landed close to my house.

In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if
some one endeavoured to open it softly. I trembled from head to
foot; I felt a presentiment of who it was, and wished to rouse one
of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was
overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in
frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an
impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.

Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the
door opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared. Shutting the
door, he approached me, and said, in a smothered voice-

"You have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that
you intend? Do you dare to break your promise? I have endured toil and
misery: I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of the
Rhine, among its willow islands, and over the summits of its hills.
I have dwelt many months in the heaths of England, and among the
deserts of Scotland. I have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold,
and hunger; do you dare destroy my hopes?"

"Begone! I do break my promise; never will I create another like
yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness."

"Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
unworthy of my condescension. Remember that I have power; you
believe yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the
light of day will be hateful to you. You are my creator, but I am your
master;- obey!"

"The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power
is arrived. Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness;
but they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion
in vice. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a daemon,
whose delight is in death and wretchedness? Begone! I am firm, and
your words will only exasperate my rage."

The monster saw my determination in my face, and gnashed his teeth
in the impotence of anger. "Shall each man," cried he, "find a wife
for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone? I had
feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and
scorn. Man! you may hate; but beware! your hours will pass in dread
and misery, and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you
your happiness for ever. Are you to be happy while I grovel in the
intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions; but
revenge remains- revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I
may die; but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun
that gazes on your misery. Beware; for I am fearless, and therefore
powerful. I will watch with the wiliness of a snake, that I may
sting with its venom. Man, you shall repent of the injuries you
inflict."

"Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of
malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to
bend beneath words. Leave me; I am inexorable."

"It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your
wedding-night."

I started forward, and exclaimed, "Villain! before you sign my
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe."

I would have seized him; but he eluded me, and quitted the house
with precipitation. In a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot
across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst
the waves.

All was again silent; but his words rung in my ears. I burned with
rage to pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the
ocean. I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my
imagination conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me. Why
had I not followed him, and closed with him in mortal strife? But I
had suffered him to depart, and he had directed his course towards the
main land. I shuddered to think who might be the next victim
sacrificed to his insatiate revenge. And then I thought again of his
words- "I will be with you on your wedding-night." That then was the
period fixed for the fulfillment of my destiny. In that hour I
should die, and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice. The
prospect did not move me to fear; yet when I thought of my beloved
Elizabeth,- of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find
her lover so barbarously snatched from her,- tears, the first I had
shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to
fall before my enemy without a bitter struggle.

The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my
feelings became calmer, if it may be called calmness, when the
violence of rage sinks into the depths of despair. I left the house,
the horrid scene of the last night's contention, and walked on the
beach of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier
between me and my fellow-creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove
the fact stole across me. I desired that I might pass my life on
that barren rock, wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden
shock of misery. If I returned, it was to be sacrificed, or to see
those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a daemon whom I had
myself created.

I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from
all it loved, and miserable in the separation. When it became noon,
and the sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass, and was
overpowered by a deep sleep. I had been awake the whole of the
preceding night, my nerves were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by
watching and misery. The sleep into which I now sunk refreshed me; and
when I awoke, I again felt as if I belonged to a race of human
beings like myself, and I began to reflect upon what had passed with
greater composure; yet still the words of the fiend rung in my ears
like a death-knell, they appeared like a dream, yet distinct and
oppressive as a reality.

The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore,
satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake,
when I saw a fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought
me a packet; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval,
entreating me to join him. He said that he was wearing away his time
fruitlessly where he was; that letters from the friends he had
formed in London desired his return to complete the negotiation they
had entered into for his Indian enterprise. He could not any longer
delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed,
even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he
entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I could
spare. He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle, and to
meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together. This
letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to quit my
island at the expiration of two days.

Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I
shuddered to reflect: I must pack up my chemical instruments; and
for that purpose I must enter the room which had been the scene of
my odious work, and I must handle those utensils, the sight of which
was sickening to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned
sufficient courage, and unlocked the door of my laboratory. The
remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had destroyed, lay
scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had mangled the
living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect myself, and then
entered the chamber. With trembling hand I conveyed the instruments
out of the room; but I reflected that I ought not to leave the
relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the
peasants; and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great
quantity of stones, and, laying them up, determined to throw them into
the sea that very night; and in the meantime I sat upon the beach,
employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.

Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had
taken place in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the
daemon. I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair, as a
thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now
felt as if a film had been taken from before my eyes, and that I,
for the first time, saw clearly. The idea of renewing my labours did
not for one instant occur to me; the threat I had heard weighed on
my thoughts, but I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine
could avert it. I had resolved in my own mind, that to create
another like the fiend I had first made would be an act of the
basest and most atrocious selfishness; and I banished from my mind
every thought that could lead to a different conclusion.

Between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and I then,
putting my basket aboard a little skill, sailed out about four miles
from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary: a few boats were
returning towards land, but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I
was about the commission of a dreadful crime, and avoided with
shuddering anxiety any encounter with my fellow-creatures. At one time
the moon, which had before been clear, was suddenly overspread by a
thick cloud, and I took advantage of the moment of darkness, and
cast my basket into the sea: I listened to the gurgling sound as it
sunk, and then sailed away from the spot. The sky became clouded;
but the air was pure, although chilled by the north-east breeze that
was then rising. But it refreshed me, and filled me with such
agreeable sensations, that I resolved to prolong my stay on the water;
and, fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the
bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and I
heard only the sound of the boat, as its keel cut through the waves;
the murmur lulled me, and in a short time I slept soundly.

I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I
awoke I found that the sun had already mounted considerably. The
wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of my
little skill. I found that the wind was north-east, and must have
driven me far from the coast from which I had embarked. I
endeavoured to change my course, but quickly found that, if I again
made the attempt, the boat would be instantly filled with water.
Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I
confess that I felt a few sensations of terror. I had no compass
with me, and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this
part of the world, that the sun was of little benefit to me. I might
be driven into the wide Atlantic, and feel all the tortures of
starvation, or be swallowed up in the immeasurable waters that
roared and buffeted around me. I had already been out many hours,
and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other
sufferings. I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that
flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others: I looked upon the
sea, it was to be my grave. "Fiend," I exclaimed, "your task is
already fulfilled!" I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, and of
Clerval; all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his
sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a revery,
so despairing and frightful, that even now, when the scene is on the
point of closing before me forever, I shudder to reflect on it.

Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined
towards the horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze, and
the sea became free from breakers. But these gave place to a heavy
swell: I felt sick, and hardly able to hold the rudder, when
suddenly I saw a line of high land towards the south.

Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue, and the dreadful suspense I
endured for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a
flood of warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.

How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging
love we have of life even in the excess of misery! I constructed
another sail with a part of my dress, and eagerly steered my course
towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance; but, as I
approached nearer, I easily perceived the traces of cultivation. I saw
vessels near the shore, and found myself suddenly transported back
to the neighbourhood of civilised man. I carefully traced the windings
of the land, and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing from
behind a small promontory. As I was in a state of extreme debility,
I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I could
most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with me. As I
turned the promontory, I perceived a small neat town and a good
harbour, which I entered, my heart bounding with joy at my
unexpected escape.

As I was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails
several people crowded towards the spot. They seemed much surprised at
my appearance; but, instead of offering me any assistance, whispered
together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in
me a slight sensation of alarm. As it was, I merely remarked that they
spoke English; and I therefore addressed them in that language: "My
good friends," said I, "will you be so kind as to tell me the name
of this town, and inform me where I am?"

"You will know that soon enough," replied a man with a hoarse
voice. "May be you are come to a place that will not prove much to
your taste; but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, promise
you."

I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from
a stranger; and I was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and
angry countenances of his companions. "Why do you answer me so
roughly?" I replied; "surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to
receive strangers so inhospitably."

"I do not know," said the man, "what the custom of the English may
be; but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains."

While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd
rapidly increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and
anger, which annoyed, and in some degree alarmed me. I inquired the
way to the inn; but no one replied. I then moved forward, and a
murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they followed and surrounded
me; when an ill-looking man approaching, tapped me on the shoulder,
and said, "Come sir, you must follow me to Mr. Kirwins, to give an
account of yourself."

"Who is Mr. Kirwin? Why am I to give an account of myself? Is
not this a free country?"

"Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a
magistrate; and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman
who was found murdered here last night."

This answer startled me; but I presently recovered myself. I was
innocent; that could easily be proved: accordingly I followed my
conductor in silence, and was led to one of the best houses in the
town. I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger; but, being
surrounded by a crowd, I thought it politic to rouse all my
strength, that no physical debility might be construed into
apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity
that was in a few moments to overwhelm me, and extinguish in horror
and despair all fear of ignominy or death.

I must pause here; for it requires all my fortitude to recall
the memory of the frightful events which I am about to relate, in
proper detail, to my recollection.

CHAPTER XXI

I WAS soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an
old benevolent man, with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me,
however, with some degree of severity: and then, turning towards my
conductors, he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.

About half a dozen men came forward; and one being selected by the
magistrate, he deposed that he had been out fishing the night before
with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, about ten
o'clock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they
accordingly put in for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had
not yet risen; they did not land at the harbour, but, as they had been
accustomed, at a creek about two miles below. He walked on first,
carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him
at some distance. As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck
his foot against something, and fell at his length on the ground.
His companions came up to assist him; and, by the light of their
lantern, they found that he had fallen on the body of a man who was to
all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was the
corpse of some person who had been drowned, and was thrown on shore by
the waves; but, on examination, they found that the clothes were not
wet, and even that the body was not then cold. They instantly
carried it to the cottage of an old woman near the spot, and
endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it to life. It appeared to be a
handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age. He had
apparently been strangled; for there was no sign of any violence,
except the black mark of fingers on his neck.

The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest
me; but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned, I remembered the
murder of my brother, and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs
trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on
a chair for support. The magistrate observed me with a keen eye, and
of course drew an unfavourable augury from my manner.

The son confirmed his father's account: but when Daniel Nugent was
called, he swore positively that, just before the fall of his
companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance
from the shore; and, as far as he could judge by the light of a few
stars, it was the same boat in which I had just landed.

A woman deposed that she lived near the beach, and was standing at
the door of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen,
about an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body, when
she saw a boat, with only one man in it, push off from that part of
the shore where the corpse was afterwards found.

Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having
brought the body into her house; it was not cold. They put it into a
bed, and rubbed it; and Daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but
life was quite gone.

Several other men were examined concerning my landing; and they
agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the
night, it was very probable that I had beaten about for many hours,
and had been obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which I
had departed. Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had
brought the body from another place, and it was likely that, as I
did not appear to know the shore, I might have put into the harbour
ignorant of the distance of the town of- from the place where I had
deposited the corpse.

Mr. Kirwin on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be
taken into the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be
observed what effect the sight of it would produce upon me. This
idea was probably suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited
when the mode of the murder had been described. I was accordingly
conducted, by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn.
I could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had
taken place during this eventful night; but knowing that I had been
conversing with several persons in the island I had inhabited about
the time that the body had been found, I was perfectly tranquil as
to the consequences of the affair.

I entered the room where the corpse lay, and was led up to the
coffin. How can I describe my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet
parched with horror, nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without
shuddering and agony. The examination, the presence of the
magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory, when I
saw the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I gasped
for breath; and, throwing myself on the body, I exclaimed, "Have my
murderous machinations deprived you also, my dearest Henry, of life?
Two I have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny: but
you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor-"

The human frame could no longer support the agonies that I
endured, and I was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.

A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of
death: my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called
myself the murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clerval.
Sometimes I entreated my attendants to assist me in the destruction of
the fiend by whom I was tormented; and at others I felt the fingers of
the monster already grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony
and terror. Fortunately, as I spoke my native language, Mr. Kirwin
alone understood me; but my gestures and bitter cries were
sufficient to affright the other witnesses.

Why did I not die? More miserable than man ever was before, why
did I not sink into forgetfulness and rest? Death snatches away many
blooming children, the only hopes of their doating parents: how many
brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health
and hope, and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb!
Of what materials was I made, that I could thus resist so many shocks,
which, like the turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture?

But I was doomed to live; and, in two months, found myself as
awaking from a dream, in a stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded
by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a
dungeon. It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to
understanding: I had forgotten the particulars of what had happened,
and only felt as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me;
but when I looked around, and saw the barred windows, and the
squalidness of the room in which I was, all flashed across my
memory, and I groaned bitterly.

This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair
beside me. She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and
her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often
characterise that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude,
like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathising in
sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indifference; she
addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one that I had
heard during my sufferings:-

"Are you better now, sir?" said she.

I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, "I believe
I am; but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry
that I am still alive to feel this misery and horror."

"For that matter," replied the old woman, "if you mean about the
gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you
were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you! However, that's
none of my business; I am sent to nurse you, and get you well; I do my
duty with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same."

I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling
a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt
languid, and unable to reflect on all that had passed. The whole
series of my life appeared to me as a dream; I sometimes doubted if
indeed it were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with
the force of reality.

As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I
grew feverish; a darkness pressed around me: no one was near me who
soothed me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me.
The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman
prepared them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first,
and the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of
the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer, but the
hangman who would gain his fee?

These were my first reflections; but I soon learned that Mr.
Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in
the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and
it was he who had provided a physician and a nurse. It is true, he
seldom came to see me; for, although he ardently desired to relieve
the sufferings of every human creature, he did not wish to be
present at the agonies and miserable ravings of a murderer. He came,
therefore, sometimes, to see that I was not neglected but his visits
were short, and with long intervals.

One day, while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a
chair, my eyes half open, and my cheeks livid like those in death. I
was overcome by gloom and misery, and often reflected I had better
seek death than desire to remain in a world which to me was replete
with wretchedness. At one time I considered whether I should not
declare myself guilty, and suffer the penalty of the law, less
innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my thoughts when the
door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered. His
countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close
to mine, and addressed me in French-

"I fear that this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything
to make you more comfortable?"

"I thank you; but all that you mention is nothing to me: on the
whole earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving."

"I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little
relief to one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. But
you will, I hope, soon quit this melancholy abode; for, doubtless,
evidence can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge."

"That is my least concern: I am, by a course of strange events,
become the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I
am and have been, can death be any evil to me?"

"Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the
strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some
surprising accident, on this shore renowned its hospitality, seized
immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was
presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
unaccountable a manner, and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
your path."

As Mr. Kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation I endured
on this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise
at the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me. suppose some
astonishment was exhibited in my countenance for Mr. Kirwin hastened
to say-

"Immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were
on your person were brought me, and I examined them that I might
discover some trace by which I could send to your relations an account
of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among
others, one which I discovered from its commencement to be from your
father. I instantly wrote to Geneva: nearly two months have elapsed
since the departure of my letter.- But you are ill; even now you
tremble: you are unfit for agitation of any kind."

"This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible
event: tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose
murder I am now to lament?"

"Your family is perfectly well," said Mr. Kirwin, with gentleness;
"and some one, a friend, is come to visit you."

I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but
it instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at
my misery, and taunt me with the death of Clerval, as a new incitement
for me to comply with his hellish desires. I put my hand before my
eyes and cried out in agony-

"Oh! take him away! I cannot see him; for God's sake do not let
him enter!"

Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance. He could not
help regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt, and
said, in rather a severe tone-

"I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your
father would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent
repugnance."

"My father!" cried I, while every feature and every muscle was
relaxed from anguish to pleasure: "is my father indeed come? How kind,
how very kind! But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?"

My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate;
perhaps he thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return
of delirium, and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. He
rose and quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father
entered it.

Nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than
the arrival of my father. I stretched out my hand to him and cried-

"Are you then safe- and Elizabeth- and Ernest?"

My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare, and
endeavoured, by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart,
to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison
cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. "What a place is this that you
inhabit, my son!" said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows
and wretched appearance of the room. "You travelled to seek happiness,
but a fatality seems to pursue you. And poor Clerval-"

The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation
too great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears.

"Alas! yes, my father," replied I; "some destiny of the most
horrible kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfill it, or
surely I should have died on the coffin of Henry."

We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and insisted that my
strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. But the
appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and I
gradually recovered my health.

As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black
melancholy that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was
forever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the
agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends
dread a dangerous relapse. Alas! why did they preserve so miserable
and detested a life? It was surely that I might fulfill my destiny,
which is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh! very soon, will death
extinguish these throbbings, and relieve me from the mighty weight
of anguish that bears me to the dust; and, in executing the award of
justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then the appearance of death was
distant although the wish was ever present to my thoughts; and I often
sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty
revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.

The season of the assizes approached. I had already been three
months in prison; and although I was still weak, and in continual
danger of a relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to
the county-town where the court was held. Mr. Kirwin charged himself
with every care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. I
was spared the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the
case was not brought before the court that decides on life and
death. The grand jury rejected the bill on its being proved that I was
on the Orkney Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and
a fortnight after my removal I was liberated from prison.

My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of
a criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh
atmosphere, and permitted to return to my native country. I did not
participate in these feelings; for to me the walls of a dungeon or a
palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned forever; and
although the sun shone upon me as upon the happy and gay of heart, I
saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated
by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. Sometimes
they were the expressive eyes of Henry languishing in death, the
dark orbs nearly covered by the lids, and the long black lashes that
fringed them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster
as I first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.

My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He
talked of Geneva, which I should soon visit- of Elizabeth and
Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes,
indeed, I felt a wish for happiness; and thought, with melancholy
delight, of my beloved cousin; or longed, with a devouring maladie
du pays, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone that had
been so dear to me in early childhood: but my general state of feeling
was a torpor in which a prison was as welcome a residence as the
divinest scene in nature; and these fits were seldom interrupted but
by paroxysms of anguish and despair. At these moments I often
endeavoured to put an end to the existence I loathed; and it
required unceasing attendance and vigilance to restrain me from
committing some dreadful act of violence.

Yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally
triumphed over my selfish despair. It was necessary that I should
return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over the lives of those
I so fondly loved; and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any
chance led me to the place of his concealment, or if he dared again to
blast me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to
the existence of the monstrous Image which I had endued with the
mockery of a soul still more monstrous. My father still desired to
delay our departure, fearful that I could not sustain the fatigues
of a journey: for I was a shattered wreck- the shadow of a human
being. My strength was gone. I was a mere skeleton; and fever night
and day preyed upon my wasted frame.

Still, as I urged our leaving Ireland with such inquietude and
impatience, my father thought it best to yield. We took our passage on
board a vessel bound for Havre-de-Grace, and sailed with a fair wind
from the Irish shores. It was midnight. I lay on the deck looking at
the stars and listening to the dashing of the waves. I hailed the
darkness that shut Ireland from my sight; and my pulse beat with a
feverish joy when I reflected that I should soon see Geneva. The
past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream; yet the
vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore
of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that
I was deceived by no vision, and that Clerval, my friend and dearest
companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I
repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while
residing with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my
departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm
that hurried me on to the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called
to mind the night in which he first lived. I was unable to pursue
the train of thought; a thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I
wept bitterly.

Ever since my recovery from the fever I had been in the custom
of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum; for it was by
means of this drug only that I was enabled to gain the rest
necessary for the preservation of life. Oppressed by the
recollection of my various misfortunes, I now swallowed double my
usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. But sleep did not afford
me respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a thousand
objects that scared me. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of
nightmare; I felt the fiend's grasp in my neck, and could not free
myself from it; groans and cries rung in my ears. My father, who was
watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing
waves were around: the cloudy sky above; the fiend was not here: a
sense of security, a feeling that a truce mas established between
the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future, imparted
to me a kind of calm forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by
its structure peculiarly susceptible.

CHAPTER XXII

THE voyage came to an end. We landed and proceeded to Paris. I
soon found that I had overtaxed my strength, and that I must repose
before I could continue my journey. My father's care and attentions
were indefatigable; but he did not know the origin of my sufferings,
and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me
to seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of man. Oh, not
abhorred! they were my brethren, my fellow beings, and I felt
attracted even to the most repulsive among them as to creatures of
an angelic nature and celestial mechanism. But I felt that I had no
right to share their intercourse. I had unchained an enemy among them,
whose it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. How
they would, each and all, abhor me, and hunt me from the world, did
they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source
in me!

My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society, and
strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought
that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge
of murder, and he endeavoured to prove to me the futility of pride.

"Alas! my father," said I, "how little do you know me. Human
beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if
such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as
innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it;
and I am the cause of this- I murdered her. William, Justine, and
Henry- they all died by my hands."

My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the
same assertion; when I thus accused myself he sometimes seemed to
desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as the
offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of
this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of
which I preserved in my convalescence. I avoided explanation, and
maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had created.
I had a persuasion that I should be supposed mad; and this in itself
would forever have chained my tongue. But, besides, I could not
bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my hearer with
consternation, and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of his
breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy, and
was silent when I would have given the world to have confided the
fatal secret. Yet still words like those I have recorded would burst
uncontrollably from me. I could offer no explanation of them; but
their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.

Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded
wonder, "My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I
entreat you never to make such an assertion again."

"I am not mad," I cried energetically; "the sun and the heavens,
who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am
the assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my
machinations. A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by
drop, to have saved their lives; but I could not, my father, indeed
I could not sacrifice the whole human race."

The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas
were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our
conversation and endeavoured to alter the course of thoughts. He
wished as much as possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that
had taken place in Ireland, and never alluded to them, or suffered
me to speak of my misfortunes.

As time passed away I became more calm: misery had her dwelling in
my heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my
own crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them. By the
utmost self-violence, I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness,
which sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world; and my
manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my
journey to the sea of ice.

A few days before we left Paris on our way to Switzerland, I
received the following letter from Elizabeth:-

My dear friend,- It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a
letter from my uncle dated at Paris; you are no longer at a formidable
distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My
poor cousin, how much you must have suffered! I expect to see you
looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva. This winter has
been passed most miserably, tortured as I have been by anxious
suspense; yet I hope to see peace in your countenance, and to find
that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity.

Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so
miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not
disturb you at this period when so many misfortunes weigh upon you;
but a conversation that I had with my uncle previous to his
departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet.

Explanation! you may possibly say; what can Elizabeth have to
explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered, and all my
doubts satisfied. But you are distant from me, and it is possible that
you may dread, and yet be pleased with this explanation; and, in a
probability of this being the case, I dare not any longer postpone
writing what, during your absence, I have often wished to express to
you, but have never had the courage to begin.

You well know, Victor, that our union has been the favourite
plan of your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when
young, and taught to look forward to it as an event that would
certainly take place. We were affectionate play-fellows during
childhood, and dear and valued friends to one another as we grew
older. But as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection
towards each other without desiring a more intimate union, may not
such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure
you by our mutual happiness, with simple truth- Do you not love
another?

You have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at
Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you
last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude, from the society of
every creature, I could not help supposing that you might regret our
connection, and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfill the wishes
of your parents although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I
love you, and that in my air dreams of futurity you have been my
constant friend and companion. But it is your happiness I desire as
well as my own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me
eternally miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free
choice. Even now I weep to think that, borne down as you are by the
cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word honour, all hope of
that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I
who have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your
miseries tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. Ah! Victor, be
assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you
not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend; and
if you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on
earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.

Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the
next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle
will send me. news of your health; and if I see but one smile on
your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of
mine, I shall need no other happiness.

         Elizabeth Lavenza.

This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten,
the threat of the fiend- "I be with you on your wedding-night!" Such
was my sentence, and on that night would the daemon employ every art
to destroy me, and tear me from the glimpse of happiness which
promised partly to console my sufferings. On that night he had
determined to consummate his crimes by my death. Well, be it so; a
deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if he were
victorious I should be at peace, and his power over me be at an end.
If he were vanquished I should be a free man. Alas! what freedom? such
as the peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his
eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned
adrift, homeless, penniless and alone, but free. Such would be my
liberty except that in my Elizabeth I possessed a treasure; alas!
balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me
until death.

Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and re-read her letter and
some softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper
paradisaical dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already
eaten, and the angel's arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I
would die to make her happy. If the monster executed his threat, death
was inevitable; yet, again, I considered whether my marriage would
hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months
sooner; but if my torturer should suspect that I postponed it
influenced by his menaces he would surely find other and perhaps
more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed to be with me on my
wedding-night, yet he did not consider that threat as binding him to
peace in the meantime; for, as if to show me that he was not yet
satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the
enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my
immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
father's happiness, my adversary's designs against my life should
not retard it a single hour.

In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and
affectionate. "I fear, my beloved girl," I said, "little happiness
remains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day enjoy is centred
in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my
life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret,
Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when revealed to you it will chill your
frame with horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery,
you will only wonder that I survive what I have endured. I will
confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our
marriage shall take place; for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect
confidence between us. But until then, I conjure you, do not mention
or allude to it. This I most earnestly entreat, and I know you will
comply."

In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth's letter we
returned to Geneva. The sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection;
yet tears were in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and
feverish cheeks. I saw a change in her also. She was thinner and had
lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but
her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit
companion for one blasted and miserable as I was.

The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory
brought madness with it; and when I thought of what had passed a
real insanity possessed me; sometimes I was furious and burnt with
rage; sometimes low and despondent. I neither spoke nor looked at
any one, but sat motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries
that overcame me.

Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her
gentle voice would soothe me when transported by passion, and
inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me
and for me. When reason returned she would remonstrate and endeavour
to inspire me with resignation. Ah! it is well for the unfortunate
to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no peace. The agonies of
remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise sometimes found in
indulging the excess of grief.

Soon after my arrival, my father spoke of my immediate marriage
with Elizabeth. I remained silent.

"Have you, then, some other attachment?"

"None on earth. I love Elizabeth, and look forward to our union
with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will
consecrate myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin."

"My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have
befallen us; but let us only cling closer to what remains, and
transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet live.
Our circle will be small, but bound close by the ties of affection and
mutual misfortune. And when time shall have softened your despair, new
and dear objects of care will be born to replace those. of whom we
have been so cruelly deprived."

Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance of
the threat returned: nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the
fiend had yet been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him
as invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words, "I shall
be with you on your wedding-night," I should regard the threatened
fate as unavoidable. But death was no evil to me if the loss of
Elizabeth were balanced with it; and I therefore, with a contented and
even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father that, if my cousin
would consent, the ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus
put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate.

Great God! if for one instant I had thought what might be the
hellish intention of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have
banished myself for ever from my native country, and wandered a
friendless outcast over the earth, than to have consented to this
miserable marriage. But, if possessed of magic powers, the monster had
blinded me to his real intentions; and when I thought that I had
prepared only my own death, I hastened that of a far dearer victim.

As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from
cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me.
But I concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity, that brought
smiles and joy to the countenance of my father, but hardly deceived
the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to
our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a little fear,
which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain
and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream, and
leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.

Preparations were made for the event; congratulatory visits were
received; and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I
could, in my own heart the anxiety that preyed there, and entered with
seeming earnestness into the plans of my father, although they might
only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father's
exertions, a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to
her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of
Como belonged to her. It was agreed that, immediately after our union,
we should proceed to Villa Lavenza, and spend our first days of
happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood.

In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in
case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger
constantly about me, and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice and
by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the
period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be
regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped
for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day
fixed for its solemnisation drew nearer and I heard it continually
spoken of as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent.

Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed
greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfill my wishes
and my destiny she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded
her; and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which I had
promised to reveal to her on the following day. My father was in the
meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised
in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.

After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my
father's; but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commerce our
journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian, and continuing our
voyage on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable,
all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.

Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed
the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along: the sun was hot,
but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy, while we
enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake,
where we saw Mont Saleve, the pleasant banks of Montalegre, and at a
distance, surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blanc, and the
assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her;
sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jura opposing
its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country,
and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to
enslave it.

I took the hand of Elizabeth: "You are sorrowful, my love. Ah!
if you knew what I have suffered, and what I may yet endure, you would
endeavour to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this
one day at least permits me to enjoy."

"Be happy, my dear Victor," replied Elizabeth; "there is, I
hope, nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy
is not painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers
to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us;
but I will not listen to such a sinister voice. Observe how fast we
move along, and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and
sometimes rise above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of
beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish
that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can distinguish
every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a divine day! how happy and
serene all nature appears!"

Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from
all reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was
fluctuating; joy for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it
continually gave place to distraction and reverie.

The sun sunk lower in the heavens; we passed the river Drance, and
observed its path through the chasms of the higher, and the glens of
the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we
approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern
boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it,
and the range of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.

The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing
rapidity, sunk at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just
ruffled the water, and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as
we approached the shore, from which it wafted the most delightful
scent of flowers and hay. The sun sunk beneath the horizon as we
landed; and as I touched the shore, I felt those cares and fears
revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me for ever.

CHAPTER XXIII

IT WAS eight o'clock when we landed; we walked for a short time
on the shore enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the
inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains,
obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.

The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great
violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens
and was beginning to descend- the clouds swept across it swifter
than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake
reflected the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by
the restless waves that were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm
of rain descended.

I had been calm during the day; but so soon as night obscured
the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was
anxious and watchful, while my right band grasped a pistol which was
hidden in my bosom; every sound terrified me; but I resolved that I
would sell my life dearly, and not shrink from the conflict until my
own life, or that of my adversary, was extinguished.

Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful
silence; but there was something in my glance which communicated
terror to her, and trembling she asked, "What is it that agitates you,
my dear Victor? What is it you fear?"

"Oh! peace, my love," replied I; "this night and all will be safe:
but this night is dreadful, very dreadful."

I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I
reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be
to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not
to join her until I had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of
my enemy.

She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the
passages of the house, and inspecting every corner that might afford a
retreat to my adversary. But I discovered no trace of him, and was
beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to
prevent the execution of his menaces, when suddenly I heard a shrill
and dreadful scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth had
retired. As I heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms
dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could
feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities
of my limbs. This state lasted but for an instant; the scream was
repeated, and I rushed into the room.

Great God! why did I not then expire! Why am I here to relate
the destruction of the best hope and the purest creature of earth? She
was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head
hanging down, and her pale and distorted features half covered by
her hair. Everywhere I turn I see the same figure- her bloodless
arms and relaxed form flung by the murderer on its bridal bier.
Could I behold this and live? Alas! life is obstinate and clings
closest where it is most hated. For a moment only did I lose
recollection; I fell senseless on the ground.

When I recovered, I found myself surrounded by the people of the
inn; their countenances expressed a breathless terror: but the
horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the
feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where
lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, my wife, so lately living, so
dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the posture in which I had
first beheld her; and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm, and a
handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have supposed
her asleep. I rushed towards her, and embraced her with ardour; but
the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what I now
held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and
cherished. The murderous mark of the fiend's grasp was on her neck,
and the breath had ceased to issue from her lips.

While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to
look up. The windows of the room had before been darkened, and I
felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon
illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been thrown back; and, with a
sensation of horror not to be described, I saw at the open window a
figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the face of the
monster; he seemed to jeer as with his fiendish finger he pointed
towards the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window and,
drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me, leaped from
his station, and, running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged
into the lake.

The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I
pointed to the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the
track with boats; nets were cast, but in vain. After passing several
hours, we returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to
have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they
proceeded to search the country, parties going in different directions
among the woods and vines.

I attempted to accompany them, and proceeded a short distance from
the house; but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a
drunken man, I fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film
covered my eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In
this state I was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of
what had happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek
something that I had lost.

After an interval I arose and, as if by instinct, crawled into the
room where the corpse of my beloved lay. There were women weeping
around- I hung over it, and joined my sad tears to theirs- all this
time no distinct idea presented itself to my mind; but my thoughts
rambled to various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes
and their cause. I was bewildered in a cloud of wonder and horror. The
death of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and
lastly of my wife; even at that moment I knew not that my only
remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father
even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead
at his feet. This idea made me shudder and recalled me to action. I
started up and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.

There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the
lake; but the wind was unfavourable and the rain fell in torrents.
However, it was hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to
arrive by night. I hired men to row, and took an oar myself; for I had
always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise.
But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation
that I endured, rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down
the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands gave way to every gloomy
idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw the scenes which were
familiar to me in my happier time, and which I had contemplated but
the day before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a
recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. The rain had ceased for a
moment, and I saw the fish play in the waters as they had done a few
hours before; they had then been observed by Elizabeth. Nothing is
so painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change. The sun
might shine or the clouds might lower: but nothing could appear to
me as it had done the day before. A fiend had snatched from me to me
as it every hope of future happiness: no creature had ever been so
miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history
of man.

But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this
last overwhelming event? Mine has been a tale of horrors; I have
reached their acme, and what I must now relate can but be tedious to
you. Know that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; I was
left desolate. My own strength is exhausted; and I must tell, in a few
words, what remains of my hideous narration.

I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived; but the
former sunk under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent
and venerable old man! his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost
their charm and their delight- his Elizabeth, his more than
daughter, whom he doated on with all that affection which a man feels,
who in the decline of life, having few affections, clings more
earnestly to those that remain. Cursed, cursed be the fiend that
brought misery on his grey hairs, and doomed him to waste in
wretchedness! He could not live under the horrors that were
accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way: he
was unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.

What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains
and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes,
indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales
with the friends of my youth; but I awoke, and. found myself in a
dungeon. Melancholy followed, but by degrees I gained a clear
conception of my miseries and situation, and was then released from my
prison. For they had called me mad; and during many months, as I
understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.

Liberty, however, had been an useless gift to me had I not, as I
awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. As the
memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on
their cause- the monster whom I had created, the miserable daemon whom
I had sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was possessed
by a maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently
prayed that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and
signal revenge on his cursed head.

Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began
to reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose,
about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in
the town, and told him that I had an accusation to make; and that I
knew the destroyer of my family; and that I required him to exert
his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer.

The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. "Be
assured, sir," said he "no pains or exertions on my part shall be
spared to discover the villain."

"I thank you," replied I; "listen, therefore, to the deposition
that I have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange that I should fear
you would not credit it were there not something in truth which,
however wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too connected to be
mistaken for a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood." My manner
as I thus addressed him, was impressive but calm; I had formed in my
heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death; and this purpose
quieted my agony, and for an interval reconciled me to life. I now
related my history, briefly, but with firmness and precision,
marking the dates with accuracy, and never deviating into or
exclamation.

The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as I
continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him sometimes
shudder with horror, at others a lively surprise, unmingled with
disbelief, was painted on his countenance.

When I had concluded my narration, I said, "This is the being whom
I accuse, and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to
exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe
and hope that your feelings as a man will not revolt from the
execution of those functions on this occasion."

This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my
own auditor. He had heard my story with that half kind of belief
that is given to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when
he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of
his incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly, "I would
willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit; but the creature of
whom you speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions
to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of
ice, and inhabit caves and dens where no man would venture to intrude?
Besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his
crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered, or
what region he may now inhabit."

"I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit;
and if he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like
the chamois, and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your
thoughts: you do not credit my narrative, and do not intend to
pursue my enemy with the punishment which is his desert."

As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was
intimidated:- "You are mistaken," said he, "I will exert myself, if it
is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer
punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have
yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove
impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you
should make up your mind to disappointment."

"That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail.
My revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice,
I confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. My
rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have
turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand:
I have but one resource; and I devote myself, either in my life or
death, to his destruction."

I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there was a
frenzy in my manner and something, I doubt not, of that haughty
fierceness which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. But to
a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas
than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much
the appearance of madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does
a child, and reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.

"Man," I cried, "how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom!
Cease; you know not what it is you say."

I broke from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to
meditate on some other mode of action.

CHAPTER XXIV

MY PRESENT situation was one in which all voluntary thought was
swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone
endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings, and
allowed me to be calculating and calm, at periods when otherwise
delirium or death would have been my portion.

My first resolution was to quit Geneva forever; my country, which,
when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity,
became hateful. I provided myself with a sum of money, together with a
few jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed.

And now my wanderings began, which are to cease but with life. I
have traversed a vast portion of the earth, and have endured all the
hardships which travellers, in deserts and barbarous countries, are
wont to meet. How I have lived I hardly know; many times have I
stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for
death. But revenge kept me alive; I dared not die and leave my
adversary in being.

When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by
which I might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was
unsettled; and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town,
uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached, I found
myself at the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and
my father reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which marked
their graves. Everything was silent, except the leaves of the trees,
which were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark; and
the scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested
observer. The spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to
cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
mourner.

The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly
gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their
murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary
existence. I knelt on the grass and kissed the earth, and with
quivering lips exclaimed, "By the sacred earth on which I kneel, by
the shades that claimed, I wander near me, by the deep and eternal
grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night, and the spirits that
preside over thee, to pursue the daemon who caused this misery until
he or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will
preserve my life: to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the
sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should
vanish from my eyes forever. And I call on you, spirits of the dead;
and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in
my work. Let the cursed and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let
him feel the despair that now torments me."

I had begun my abjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost
assured me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved
my devotion; but the furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage
choked my utterance.

I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and
fiendish laugh. it rung on my ears long and heavily; the mountains
re-echoed it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and
laughter. Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by
frenzy, and have destroyed my miserable existence, but that my vow was
heard and that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away;
when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear,
addressed me in an audible whisper- "I am satisfied: miserable wretch!
you have determined to live, and I am satisfied."

I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded; but
the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose
and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with
more than mortal speed.

I pursued him; and for many months this has been my task. Guided
by a slight clue I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The
blue Mediterranean appeared; and, by a strange chance, I saw the fiend
enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I
took my passage in the same ship; but he escaped, I know not how.

Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded
me, I have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants,
scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes
he himself, who feared that if I lost all trace of him I should
despair and die, left some mark to guide me. The snows descended on my
head, and I saw the print of his huge step on the white plain. To
you first entering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how
can you understand what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and
fatigue were the least pains which I was destined to endure; I was
cursed by some devil, and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet
still a spirit of good followed and directed my steps; and, when I
most murmured, would suddenly extricate me from seemingly
insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes, when nature, overcome by
hunger, sunk under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me in the
desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was, indeed,
coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate; but I will not
doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had invoked to aid
me. Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and I was
parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few
drops that revived me, and vanish.

I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the
daemon generally avoided these, as it was here that the population
of the country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were
seldom seen; and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that
crossed my path. I had money with me, and gained the friendship of the
villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I
had killed, which, after taking a small part, I always presented to
those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.

My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was
during sleep alone that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! often,
when most miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to
rapture. The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or
rather hours, of happiness, that I might retain strength to fulfill my
pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my
hardships. During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope
of night: for in sleep I saw my friends, my wife, and my beloved
country; again I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, heard
the silver tones of my Elizabeth's voice, and beheld Clerval
enjoying health and youth. Often, when wearied by a toilsome march,
I persuaded myself that I was dreaming, until night should come, and
that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends.
What agonising fondness did I feel for them! how did I cling to
their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours,
and persuade myself that they still lived! At such moments
vengeance, that burned within me, died in my heart, and I pursued my
path towards the destruction of the daemon more as a task enjoined
by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was
unconscious, than as the ardent desire of my soul.

What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know. Sometimes,
indeed, he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees, or cut
in stone, that guided me and instigated my fury. "My reign is not
yet over" (these words were legible in one of these inscriptions);
"you live, and my power is complete. Follow me; I seek the everlasting
ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of cold and frost to
which I am impassive. You will find near this place, if you follow not
too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, enemy; we
have yet to wrestle for our lives; but many hard and miserable hours
must you endure until that period shall arrive."

Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote
thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I give up my
search until he or I perish; and then with what ecstasy shall I join
my Elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me
the reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!

As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows
thickened and the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to
support. The peasants were shut up in their hovels, and only a few
of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom
starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey. The
rivers were covered with ice and no fish could be procured; and thus I
was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.

The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my
labours. One inscription that he left was in these words:- "Prepare!
your toils only begin: wrap yourself in furs and provide food; for
we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will
satisfy my everlasting hatred."

My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing
words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose; and, calling on Heaven to
support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense
deserts until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost
boundary of the horizon. Oh! how unlike it was to the blue seas of the
south! Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land
by its superior wildness and ruggedness. The Greeks wept for joy
when they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and
hailed with rapture the boundary of their toils. I did not weep; but I
knelt down and, with a full heart, thanked my guiding spirit for
conducting me in safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my
adversary's gibe, to meet and grapple with him.

Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs,
and thus traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. I know not
whether the fiend possessed the same advantages; but I found that,
as before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him:
so much so that, when I first saw the ocean, he was but one day's
journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him before he should
reach the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two
days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the sea-shore. I inquired of
the inhabitants concerning the fiend, and gained accurate information.
A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night armed with a
gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a
solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance. He had
carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to
draw which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had
harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck
villagers, had pursued his journey across the sea in a direction
that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must speedily be
destroyed by the breaking of the ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.

On hearing this information, I suffered a temporary access of
despair. He had escaped me; and I must commence a destructive and
almost endless journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean-
amidst cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure, and which
I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to
survive. Yet at the idea that the fiend should live and be triumphant,
my rage and vengeance returned, and, like a mighty tide, overwhelmed
every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits
of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I
prepared for my journey.

I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the
inequalities of the Frozen Ocean; and purchasing a plentiful stock
of provisions, I departed from land.

I cannot guess how many days have passed since then; but I have
endured misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just
retribution burning within my heart could have enabled me to
support. Immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up my
passage, and I often heard the thunder of the ground sea which
threatened my destruction. But again the frost came and made the paths
of the sea secure.

By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should
guess that I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual
protraction of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter
drops of despondency and grief from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost
secured her prey, and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery.
Once, after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil
gained the summit of a sloping ice-mountain, and one, sinking under
his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when
suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained
my sight to discover what it could be, and uttered a wild cry of
ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of
a well-known form within. Oh! with what a burning gush did hope
revisit my heart! warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped
away that they might not intercept the view I had of the daemon; but
still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops until, giving way to
the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud.

But this was not the time for delay: I disencumbered the dogs of
their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food; and,
after an hour's rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which
was bitterly irksome to me, I continued my route. The sledge was still
visible; nor did I again lose sight of it except at the moments when
for a short time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening
crags. I indeed perceptibly gained on it; and when, after nearly two
days' journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my
heart bounded within me.

But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my,
hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more
utterly than I had ever done before. A ground sea was heard; the
thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath
me, became every moment more ominous and terrific. I pressed on, but
in vain. The wind arose; the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock
of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a tremendous and
overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished: in a few minutes a
tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and I was left drifting
on a scattered piece of ice, that was continually lessening, and
thus preparing for me a hideous death.

In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs
died; and I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of
distress when I saw your vessel riding at anchor, and holding forth to
me hopes of succour and life. I had no conception that vessels ever
came so far north, and was astonished at the sight. I quickly
destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars; and by these means
was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice-raft in the
direction of your ship. I had determined, if you were going southward,
still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon
my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which I
could pursue my enemy. But your direction was northward. You took me
on board when my vigour was exhausted, and I should soon have sunk
under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread- for my
task is unfulfilled.

Oh! when will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the daemon,
allow me the rest I so much desire; or must I die and he yet live?
If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape; that you
will seek him and satisfy my vengeance in his death. And do I dare
to ask of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that
I have undergone? No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am dead, if
he should appear; if the ministers of vengeance should conduct him
to you, swear that he shall not live- swear that he shall not
triumph over my accumulated woes, and survive to add to the list of
his dark crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive; and once his words had
even power over my heart: but trust him not. His soul is as hellish as
his form, full of treachery and fiendish malice. Hear him not; call on
the names of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of
the wretched Victor, and thrust your sword into his heart. I will
hover near and direct the steel aright.

You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do
you not feel your blood congeal with horror like that which even now
curdles mine? Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could not
continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing,
uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine
and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to
downcast sorrow, and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he
commanded his countenance and tones, and related the most horrible
incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of
agitation; then, like a volcano bursting forth, his face would
suddenly change to an expression of the wildest rage, as he shrieked
out imprecations on his persecutor.

His tale is connected, and told with an appearance of the simplest
truth; yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which
he showed me, and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship,
brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative
than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a
monster has then really existence! I cannot doubt it; yet I am lost in
surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from
Frankenstein the particulars of his creature's formation: but on
this point he was impenetrable.

"Are you mad, my friend?" said he; "or whither does your senseless
curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the world a
daemoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! learn my miseries, and do not seek to
increase your own."

Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his
history: he asked to see them, and then himself corrected and
augmented them in many places; but principally in giving the life
and spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy. "Since you
have preserved my narration," said he, "I would not that a mutilated
one should go down to posterity."

Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the
strangest tale that ever imagination formed. My thoughts, and every
feeling of my soul, have been drunk up by the interest for my guest,
which this tale, and his own elevated and gentle manners, have
created. I wish to soothe him; yet can I counsel one so infinitely
miserable, so destitute of every hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no!
the only joy that he can now know will be when he composes his
shattered spirit to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the
offspring of solitude and delirium: he believes that, when in dreams
he holds converse with his friends and derives from that communion
consolation for his miseries or excitements to his vengeance, they are
not the creations of his fancy, but the beings themselves who visit
him from the regions of a remote world. This faith gives a solemnity
to his reveries that render them to me almost as imposing and
interesting as truth.

Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and
misfortunes. On every point of general literature he displays
unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension. His
eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can I heir him, when he
relates a pathetic incident, or endeavours to move the passions of
pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have
been in the days of his prosperity when he is thus noble and godlike
in ruin! He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.

"When younger," said he, "I believed myself destined for some
great enterprise. My feelings are profound; but I possessed a coolness
of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements. This
sentiment of the worth of my nature supported me when others would
have been oppressed; for I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless
grief those talents that might be useful to my fellow-creatures.
When I reflected on the work I had completed, no less a one than the
creation of a sensitive and rational animal, could not rank myself
with the herd of common projectors. But this thought, which
supported me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to
plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as
nothing; and, like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am
chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of
analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities
I conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man. Even now I
cannot recollect without passion my reveries while the work was
incomplete. I trod heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers,
now burning with the idea of their effects. From my infancy I was
imbued with high hopes and a lofty ambition; but how am I sunk! Oh! my
friend, if you had known me as I once was you would not recognise me
in this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart; a
high destiny seemed to bear me on until I fell, never, never again
to rise."

Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend;
I have sought one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on
these desert seas I have found such a one; but I fear I have gained
him only to know his value and lose him. I would reconcile him to
life, but he repulses the idea.

"I thank you, Walton, "he said, "for your kind intentions
towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and
fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone?
Can any man be to me as Clerval was; or any woman another Elizabeth?
Even where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior
excellence, the companions of our childhood always possess a certain
power over our minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. They
know our infantile dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards
modified, are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with
more certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. A
sister or a brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been
shown early, suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another
friend, however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself,
be contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only
through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever
I am the soothing voice of my Elizabeth and the conversation of
Clerval will be ever whispered in my ear. They are dead, and but one
feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If I
were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive
utility to my fellow-creatures, then could I live to fulfill it. But
such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the being to whom
I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may
die."

            September 2nd.

My beloved Sister,- I write to you encompassed by peril and ignorant
whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England, and the dearer
friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice which
admit of no escape and threaten every moment to crush my vessel. The
brave fellows whom I have persuaded to be my companions look towards
me for aid; but I have none to bestow. There is something terribly
appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me.
Yet it is terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are
endangered through me. If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.

And what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You will not
hear of my destruction, and you will anxiously await my return.
Years will pass, and you will have visitings of despair, and yet be
tortured by hope. Oh! my beloved sister, the sickening failing of your
heartfelt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my
own death. But you have a husband and lovely children; you may be
happy: Heaven bless you and make you so!

My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion.
He endeavours to fill me with hope; and talks as if life were a
possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents
have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and, in
spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. Even the
sailors feel the power of his eloquence: when he speaks they no longer
despair; he rouses their energies and, while they hear his voice, they
believe these vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish
before the resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory; each day
of expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost dread a
mutiny caused by this despair.

            September 5th.

A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that although it
is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot
forbear recording it.

We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent
danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive,
and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave
amidst this scene of desolation. Frankenstein has daily declined in
health: a feverish fire still glimmers in his eyes; but he is
exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion he speedily
sinks again into apparent lifelessness.

I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny.
This morning, as I sat watching the wan countenance of my friend-
his eyes half closed, and his limbs hanging listlessly- I was roused
by half a dozen of the sailors who demanded admission into the
cabin. They entered, and their leader addressed me. He told me that he
and his companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in
deputation to me, to make me a requisition which, in justice, I
could not refuse. We were immured in ice and should probably never
escape; but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should
dissipate, and a free passage be opened, I should be rash enough to
continue my voyage and lead them into fresh dangers after they might
happily have surmounted this. They insisted, therefore, that I
should engage with a solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed
I would instantly direct my course southward.

This speech troubled me. I had not despaired; nor had I yet
conceived the idea of returning if set free. Yet could I, in
justice, or even in possibility, refuse this demand? I hesitated
before I answered; when Frankenstein, who had at first been silent,
and, indeed, appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now
roused himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with
momentary vigour. Turning towards the men he said-

"What do you mean? What do you demand of your captain? Are you
then so easily turned from your design? Did you not call this a
glorious expedition? And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the
way was smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full
of dangers and terror; because at every new incident your fortitude
was to be called forth and your courage exhibited; because danger
and death surrounded it, and these you were to brave and overcome. For
this was it a glorious, for this was it an honourable undertaking. You
were hereafter to be hailed as the benefactors of your species; your
names adored as belonging to brave men who encountered death for
honour and the benefit of mankind. And now, behold, with the first
imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first mighty and
terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away, and are content to be
handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and
peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm
firesides. Why that requires not this preparation; ye need not have
come thus far, and dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat,
merely to prove yourselves cowards. Oh! be men, or be more than men.
Be steady to your purposes and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of
such stuff as your hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand
you if you say that it shall not. Do not return to your families
with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows. Return as heroes who
have fought and conquered, and who know not what it is to turn their
backs on the foe."

He spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different
feelings expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty
design and heroism, that can you wonder that these men were moved?
They looked at one another and were unable to reply. I spoke; I told
them to retire and consider of what had been said: that I would not
lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary;
but that I hoped that, with reflection, their courage would return.

They retired, and I turned towards my friend; but he was sunk in
languor and almost deprived of life.

How all this will terminate I know not; but I had rather die
than return shamefully- my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will
be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can
never willingly continue to endure their present hardships.

             September 7th.

The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not
destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I
come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy
than I possess to bear this injustice with patience.

            September 12th.

It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of
utility and glory;- I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to
detail these bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while
I am wafted towards England, and towards you, I will not despond.

September 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder
were heard at a distance as the islands split and cracked in every
direction. We were in the most imminent peril; but, as we could only
remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by unfortunate
quest, whose illness increased in such a degree that he was entirely
confined to his bed. The ice cracked behind us, and was driven with
force towards the north; a breeze sprung from the west, and on the
11th the passage towards the south became perfectly free. When the
sailors saw this, and that their return to their native country was
apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud
and long continued. Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked
the cause of the tumult. "They shout," I said, "because they will soon
return to England."

"Do you then really return?"

"Alas! yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them
unwillingly to danger, and I must return."

"Do so, if you will; but I will not. You may give up your purpose,
but mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and I dare not. I am weak; but
surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with
sufficient strength." Saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the
bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted.

It was long before he was restored; and I often thought that
life was entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes; he breathed
with difficulty, and was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a
composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the
meantime he told me that my friend had not many hours to live.

His sentence was pronounced, and I could only grieve and be
patient. I sat by his bed watching him; his eyes were closed, and I
thought he slept; but presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and
bidding me come near, said- "Alas! the strength I relied on is gone; I
feel that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still
be in being. Think not, Walten, that in the last moments of my
existence I feel that burning hatred: and ardent desire of revenge I
once expressed; but I feel myself justified in desiring the death of
my adversary. During these last days I have been occupied in examining
my past conduct; nor do I find it blamable. In a fit of enthusiastic
madness I created a rational creature, and was bound towards him, to
assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and well-being.
This was my duty; but there was another still paramount to that. My
duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to my
attention, because they included a greater proportion of happiness
or misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did right in refusing,
to create a companion for the first creature. He showed unparalleled
malignity and selfishness, in evil: he destroyed my friends; he
devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations,
happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know where this thirst for vengeance
may end. Miserable himself, that he may render no other wretched he
ought to die. The task of his destruction was mine, but I have failed.
When actuated by selfish and vicious motives I asked you to
undertake my unfinished work; and I renew this request now when I am
only induced by reason and virtue.

"Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to
fulfill this task; and now that you are returning to England you
will have little chance of meeting with him. But the consideration
of these points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your
duties, I leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by
the near approach of death. I dare not ask you to do what I think
right, for I may still be misled by passion.

"That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs
me; in other respects, this hour, when I momentarily expect my
release, is the only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years.
The forms of the beloved dead flit before me and I hasten to their
arms. Farewell, Walton! Seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid
ambition, even if it be only the apparently innocent one of
distinguishing yourself in science and discoveries. Yet why do I say
this? I have myself been blasted in these hopes, yet another may
succeed."

His voice became fainter as he spoke; and at length, exhausted
by his effort, he sunk into silence. About half an hour afterwards
he attempted again to speak, but was unable; he pressed my hand
feebly, and his eyes closed forever, while the irradiation of a gentle
smile passed away from his lips.

Margaret, what comment can I make on the untimely extinction of
this glorious spirit? What can I say that will enable you to
understand the depth of my sorrow? All that I should express would
be inadequate and feeble. My tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by
a cloud of disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may
there find consolation.

I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is midnight;
the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again;
there is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the
cabin where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and
examine. Good night, my sister.

Great God! what a scene has just taken place! I am yet dizzy
with the remembrance of it. I hardly know whether I shall have the
power to detail it; yet the tale which I have recorded would be
incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe.

I entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and
admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot find words to
describe; gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its
proportions. As he hung over the coffin his face was concealed by long
locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and
apparent texture like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my
approach he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and
sprung towards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible
as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my
eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties
with regard to this destroyer. I called on him to stay.

He paused, looking on me with wonder; and, again turning towards
the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and
every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of
some uncontrollable passion.

"That is also my victim!" he exclaimed: "in his murder my crimes
are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its
close! Oh, Frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! what does it
avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed
thee by destroying all thou lovest. Alas! he is cold, he cannot answer
me."

His voice seemed suffocated; and my first impulses, which had
suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend, in
destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and
compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not again
raise my eyes to his face, there was something so scaring and
unearthly in his ugliness. I attempted to speak, but the words died
away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent
self-reproaches. At length I gathered resolution to address him in a
pause of the tempest of his passion: "Your repentance," I said, "is
now superfluous. If you had listened to the voice of conscience, and
heeded the stings of remorse, before you had urged your diabolical
vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived."

"And do you dream?" said the daemon; "do you think that I was then
dead to agony and remorse?- He," he continued, pointing to the corpse,
"he suffered not in the consummation of the deed- oh! not the
ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the
lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried
me on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. Think you that the
groans of Clerval were music to my ears? My heart was fashioned to
be susceptible of love and sympathy; and when wrenched by misery to
vice and hatred it did not endure the violence of the change without
torture such as you cannot even imagine.

"After the murder of Clerval I returned to Switzerland heartbroken
and overcome. I pitied Frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror: I
abhorred myself But when I discovered that he, the author at once of
my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for
happiness; that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon
me he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the
indulgence of which I was forever barred, then impotent envy and
bitter indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for
vengeance. I recollected my threat and resolved that it should be
accomplished. I knew that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture;
but I was the slave, not the master, of an impulse which I detested,
yet could not disobey. Yet when she died!- nay, then I was not
miserable. I had cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in
the excess of my despair. Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged
thus far, I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I
had willingly chosen. The completion of my daemoniacal design became
an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!"

I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when
I called to mind what Frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence
and persuasion, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form
of my friend, indignation was rekindled within me. "Wretch!" I said,
"it is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you
have made. You throw a torch into a pile of buildings; and when they
are consumed you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical
fiend! if he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object,
again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is
not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of your
malignity is withdrawn from your power."

"Oh, it not thus- not thus," interrupted the being; "yet such must
be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be the purport of
my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow-feeling in my misery. No
sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the love of
virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole
being overflowed, that I wished to be participated. But now that
virtue has become to me a shadow and that happiness and affection
are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for
sympathy? I am content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall
endure: when I die, I am well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium
should load my memory. Once my fancy was soothed with dreams of
virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. Once I falsely hoped to meet with
beings who, pardoning my outward form, would love me for the excellent
qualities which I was capable of unfolding. I was nourished with
high thoughts of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me
beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no
misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful
catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same creature
whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent
visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is even
so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of
God and man had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone.

"You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have a
knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes. But in the detail which he
gave you of them he could not sum up the hours and months of misery
which I endured, wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed
his hopes, I did not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever ardent
and craving; still I desired love and fellowship, and I was still
spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only
criminal when all human kind sinned against me? Why do you not hate
Felix who drove his friend from his door with contumely? Why do you
not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the saviour of his
child? Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings! I, the miserable
and abandoned, am an abortion, to be spurned, and kicked at, and
trampled on. Even now my blood boils at the recollection of this
injustice.

"But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely and
the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept, and grasped
to death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing.
I have devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy
of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even
to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You
hate me; but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard
myself I look on the hands which executed the deed; think on the heart
in which the imagination of it was conceived, and long for the
moment when these hands will meet my eyes, when that imagination
will haunt my thoughts no more.

"Fear not that I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My
work is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man's death is needed
to consummate the series of my being, and accomplish that which must
be done; but it requires my own. Do not think that I shall be slow
to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice-raft
which brought me thither, and shall seek the most northern extremity
of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes
this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any
curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as I
have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now
consume me, or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He
is dead who called me into being; and when I shall be no more the very
remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no longer see the
sun or stars, or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and
sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my
happiness. Some years ago, when the images which this world affords
first opened upon me, when I felt the cheering warmth of summer, and
heard the rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and
these were all to me, I should have wept to die; now it is my only
consolation. Polluted by crimes, and tom by the bitterest remorse,
where can I find rest but in death?

"Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of human kind whom
these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert
yet alive, and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it
would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was
not so; thou didst seek my extinction that I might not cause greater
wretchedness; and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hast not
ceased to think and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a
vengeance greater than that which I feel. Blasted as thou wert, my
agony was still superior to thine; for the bitter sting of remorse
will not cease to rankle in my wounds until death shall close them for
ever.

"But soon," he cried, with sad and solemn enthusiasm, "I shall
die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning
miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly,
and exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The light of that
conflagration will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by
the winds. My spirit will sleep in peace; or if it thinks, it will not
surely think thus. Farewell."

He sprung from the cabin-window, as he said this, upon the
ice-raft which lay close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by
the waves and lost in darkness and distance.

THE END
A Tale of Two Cities, by Charles Dickens
[A story of the French Revolution]

CONTENTS


Book the First--Recalled to Life

Chapter I      The Period
Chapter II     The Mail
Chapter III    The Night Shadows
Chapter IV     The Preparation
Chapter V      The Wine-shop
Chapter VI     The Shoemaker


Book the Second--the Golden Thread

Chapter I      Five Years Later
Chapter II     A Sight
Chapter III    A Disappointment
Chapter IV     Congratulatory
Chapter V      The Jackal
Chapter VI     Hundreds of People
Chapter VII    Monseigneur in Town
Chapter VIII   Monseigneur in the Country
Chapter IX     The Gorgon's Head
Chapter X      Two Promises
Chapter XI     A Companion Picture
Chapter XII    The Fellow of Delicacy
Chapter XIII   The Fellow of no Delicacy
Chapter XIV    The Honest Tradesman
Chapter XV     Knitting
Chapter XVI    Still Knitting
Chapter XVII   One Night
Chapter XVIII  Nine Days
Chapter XIX    An Opinion
Chapter XX     A Plea
Chapter XXI    Echoing Footsteps
Chapter XXII   The Sea still Rises
Chapter XXIII  Fire Rises
Chapter XXIV   Drawn to the Loadstone Rock


Book the Third--the Track of a Storm

Chapter I      In Secret
Chapter II     The Grindstone
Chapter III    The Shadow
Chapter IV     Calm in Storm
Chapter V      The Wood-sawyer
Chapter VI     Triumph
Chapter VII    A Knock at the Door
Chapter VIII   A Hand at Cards
Chapter IX     The Game Made
Chapter X      The Substance of the Shadow
Chapter XI     Dusk
Chapter XII    Darkness
Chapter XIII   Fifty-two
Chapter XIV    The Knitting Done
Chapter XV     The Footsteps die out For ever





Book the First--Recalled to Life




I

The Period


It was the best of times, it was the worst of times,
it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness,
it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity,
it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness,
it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair,
we had everything before us, we had nothing before us,
we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct
the other way--in short, the period was so far like the present
period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its
being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree
of comparison only.

There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a plain face,
on the throne of England; there were a king with a large jaw and
a queen with a fair face, on the throne of France.  In both
countries it was clearer than crystal to the lords of the State
preserves of loaves and fishes, that things in general were
settled for ever.

It was the year of Our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five.  Spiritual revelations were conceded to England at
that favoured period, as at this.  Mrs. Southcott had recently
attained her five-and-twentieth blessed birthday, of whom a
prophetic private in the Life Guards had heralded the sublime
appearance by announcing that arrangements were made for the
swallowing up of London and Westminster.  Even the Cock-lane
ghost had been laid only a round dozen of years, after rapping
out its messages, as the spirits of this very year last past
(supernaturally deficient in originality) rapped out theirs.
Mere messages in the earthly order of events had lately come to
the English Crown and People, from a congress of British subjects
in America:  which, strange to relate, have proved more important
to the human race than any communications yet received through
any of the chickens of the Cock-lane brood.

France, less favoured on the whole as to matters spiritual than
her sister of the shield and trident, rolled with exceeding
smoothness down hill, making paper money and spending it.
Under the guidance of her Christian pastors, she entertained
herself, besides, with such humane achievements as sentencing
a youth to have his hands cut off, his tongue torn out with
pincers, and his body burned alive, because he had not kneeled
down in the rain to do honour to a dirty procession of monks
which passed within his view, at a distance of some fifty or
sixty yards.  It is likely enough that, rooted in the woods of
France and Norway, there were growing trees, when that sufferer
was put to death, already marked by the Woodman, Fate, to come
down and be sawn into boards, to make a certain movable framework
with a sack and a knife in it, terrible in history.  It is likely
enough that in the rough outhouses of some tillers of the heavy
lands adjacent to Paris, there were sheltered from the weather
that very day, rude carts, bespattered with rustic mire, snuffed
about by pigs, and roosted in by poultry, which the Farmer, Death,
had already set apart to be his tumbrils of the Revolution.
But that Woodman and that Farmer, though they work unceasingly,
work silently, and no one heard them as they went about with
muffled tread:  the rather, forasmuch as to entertain any suspicion
that they were awake, was to be atheistical and traitorous.

In England, there was scarcely an amount of order and protection
to justify much national boasting.  Daring burglaries by armed
men, and highway robberies, took place in the capital itself
every night; families were publicly cautioned not to go out of
town without removing their furniture to upholsterers' warehouses
for security; the highwayman in the dark was a City tradesman in
the light, and, being recognised and challenged by his fellow-
tradesman whom he stopped in his character of "the Captain,"
gallantly shot him through the head and rode away; the mall was
waylaid by seven robbers, and the guard shot three dead, and then
got shot dead himself by the other four, "in consequence of the
failure of his ammunition:" after which the mall was robbed in
peace; that magnificent potentate, the Lord Mayor of London, was
made to stand and deliver on Turnham Green, by one highwayman,
who despoiled the illustrious creature in sight of all his
retinue; prisoners in London gaols fought battles with their
turnkeys, and the majesty of the law fired blunderbusses in among
them, loaded with rounds of shot and ball; thieves snipped off
diamond crosses from the necks of noble lords at Court
drawing-rooms; musketeers went into St. Giles's, to search for
contraband goods, and the mob fired on the musketeers, and the
musketeers fired on the mob, and nobody thought any of these
occurrences much out of the common way.  In the midst of them,
the hangman, ever busy and ever worse than useless, was in
constant requisition; now, stringing up long rows of miscellaneous
criminals; now, hanging a housebreaker on Saturday who had been
taken on Tuesday; now, burning people in the hand at Newgate by
the dozen, and now burning pamphlets at the door of Westminster Hall;
to-day, taking the life of an atrocious murderer, and to-morrow of a
wretched pilferer who had robbed a farmer's boy of sixpence.

All these things, and a thousand like them, came to pass in
and close upon the dear old year one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five.  Environed by them, while the Woodman and the
Farmer worked unheeded, those two of the large jaws, and those
other two of the plain and the fair faces, trod with stir enough,
and carried their divine rights with a high hand.  Thus did the
year one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five conduct their
Greatnesses, and myriads of small creatures--the creatures of this
chronicle among the rest--along the roads that lay before them.



II

The Mail


It was the Dover road that lay, on a Friday night late in November,
before the first of the persons with whom this history has business.
The Dover road lay, as to him, beyond the Dover mail, as it
lumbered up Shooter's Hill.  He walked up hill in the mire
by the side of the mail, as the rest of the passengers did;
not because they had the least relish for walking exercise, under the
circumstances, but because the hill, and the harness, and the mud,
and the mail, were all so heavy, that the horses had three times
already come to a stop, besides once drawing the coach across the road,
with the mutinous intent of taking it back to Blackheath.  Reins and whip
and coachman and guard, however, in combination, had read that article
of war which forbade a purpose otherwise strongly in favour of the argument,
that some brute animals are endued with Reason; and the team had capitulated
and returned to their duty.

With drooping heads and tremulous tails, they mashed their way
through the thick mud, floundering and stumbling between whiles,
as if they were falling to pieces at the larger joints.  As often
as the driver rested them and brought them to a stand, with a
wary "Wo-ho! so-ho- then!" the near leader violently shook his
head and everything upon it--like an unusually emphatic horse,
denying that the coach could be got up the hill.  Whenever the
leader made this rattle, the passenger started, as a nervous
passenger might, and was disturbed in mind.

There was a steaming mist in all the hollows, and it had roamed
in its forlornness up the hill, like an evil spirit, seeking rest
and finding none.  A clammy and intensely cold mist, it made its
slow way through the air in ripples that visibly followed and
overspread one another, as the waves of an unwholesome sea might
do.  It was dense enough to shut out everything from the light of
the coach-lamps but these its own workings, and a few yards of
road; and the reek of the labouring horses steamed into it, as if
they had made it all.

Two other passengers, besides the one, were plodding up the hill
by the side of the mail.  All three were wrapped to the cheekbones
and over the ears, and wore jack-boots.  Not one of the three
could have said, from anything he saw, what either of the other
two was like; and each was hidden under almost as many wrappers
from the eyes of the mind, as from the eyes of the body, of his
two companions.  In those days, travellers were very shy of being
confidential on a short notice, for anybody on the road might be
a robber or in league with robbers.  As to the latter, when every
posting-house and ale-house could produce somebody in "the Captain's"
pay, ranging from the landlord to the lowest stable non-descript,
it was the likeliest thing upon the cards.  So the guard of the
Dover mail thought to himself, that Friday night in November, one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, lumbering up Shooter's
Hill, as he stood on his own particular perch behind the mail,
beating his feet, and keeping an eye and a hand on the arm-chest
before him, where a loaded blunderbuss lay at the top of six or
eight loaded horse-pistols, deposited on a substratum of cutlass.

The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that the guard
suspected the passengers, the passengers suspected one another
and the guard, they all suspected everybody else, and the coachman
was sure of nothing but the horses; as to which cattle he could
with a clear conscience have taken his oath on the two Testaments
that they were not fit for the journey.

"Wo-ho!" said the coachman.  "So, then!  One more pull and you're
at the top and be to you, for I have had trouble enough to
get you to it!--Joe!"

"Halloa!" the guard replied.

"What o'clock do you make it, Joe?"

"Ten minutes, good, past eleven."

"My blood!" ejaculated the vexed coachman, "and not atop of
Shooter's yet!  Tst!  Yah!  Get on with you! "

The emphatic horse, cut short by the whip in a most decided
negative, made a decided scramble for it, and the three other
horses followed suit.  Once more, the Dover mail struggled on,
with the jack-boots of its passengers squashing along by its
side.  They had stopped when the coach stopped, and they kept
close company with it.  If any one of the three had had the
hardihood to propose to another to walk on a little ahead into
the mist and darkness, he would have put himself in a fair way
of getting shot instantly as a highwayman.

The last burst carried the mail to the summit of the hill.
The horses stopped to breathe again, and the guard got down to
skid the wheel for the descent, and open the coach-door to let
the passengers in.

"Tst!  Joe!" cried the coachman in a warning voice, looking down
from his box.

"What do you say, Tom?"

They both listened.

"I say a horse at a canter coming up, Joe."

"_I_ say a horse at a gallop, Tom," returned the guard, leaving
his hold of the door, and mounting nimbly to his place.
"Gentlemen!  In the kings name, all of you!"

With this hurried adjuration, he cocked his blunderbuss, and
stood on the offensive.

The passenger booked by this history, was on the coach-step,
getting in; the two other passengers were close behind him, and
about to follow.  He remained on the step, half in the coach and
half out of; they re-mained in the road below him.  They all
looked from the coachman to the guard, and from the guard to the
coachman, and listened.  The coachman looked back and the guard
looked back, and even the emphatic leader pricked up his ears and
looked back, without contradicting.

The stillness consequent on the cessation of the rumbling and and
labouring of the coach, added to the stillness of the night, made
it very quiet indeed.  The panting of the horses communicated a
tremulous motion to the coach, as if it were in a state of
agitation.  The hearts of the passengers beat loud enough perhaps
to be heard; but at any rate, the quiet pause was audibly
expressive of people out of breath, and holding the breath, and
having the pulses quickened by expectation.

The sound of a horse at a gallop came fast and furiously up the hill.

"So-ho!" the guard sang out, as loud as he could roar.  "Yo there!
Stand!  I shall fire!"

The pace was suddenly checked, and, with much splashing and floundering,
a man's voice called from the mist, "Is that the Dover mail?"

"Never you mind what it is!" the guard retorted.  "What are you?"

"IS that the Dover mail?"

"Why do you want to know?"

"I want a passenger, if it is."

"What passenger?"

"Mr. Jarvis Lorry."

Our booked passenger showed in a moment that it was his name.
The guard, the coachman, and the two other passengers eyed him
distrustfully.

"Keep where you are," the guard called to the voice in the mist,
"because, if I should make a mistake, it could never be set right
in your lifetime.  Gentleman of the name of Lorry answer straight."

"What is the matter?" asked the passenger, then, with mildly
quavering speech.  "Who wants me?  Is it Jerry?"

("I don't like Jerry's voice, if it is Jerry," growled the guard
to himself.  "He's hoarser than suits me, is Jerry.")

"Yes, Mr. Lorry."

"What is the matter?"

"A despatch sent after you from over yonder.  T. and Co."

"I know this messenger, guard," said Mr. Lorry, getting down into
the road--assisted from behind more swiftly than politely by the
other two passengers, who immediately scrambled into the coach,
shut the door, and pulled up the window.  "He may come close;
there's nothing wrong."

"I hope there ain't, but I can't make so 'Nation sure of that,"
said the guard, in gruff soliloquy.  "Hallo you!"

"Well!  And hallo you!" said Jerry, more hoarsely than before.

"Come on at a footpace! d'ye mind me?  And if you've got holsters
to that saddle o' yourn, don't let me see your hand go nigh 'em.
For I'm a devil at a quick mistake, and when I make one it takes
the form of Lead.  So now let's look at you."

The figures of a horse and rider came slowly through the eddying
mist, and came to the side of the mail, where the passenger stood.
The rider stooped, and, casting up his eyes at the guard, handed
the passenger a small folded paper.  The rider's horse was blown,
and both horse and rider were covered with mud, from the hoofs of
the horse to the hat of the man.

"Guard!" said the passenger, in a tone of quiet business confidence.

The watchful guard, with his right hand at the stock of his raised
blunderbuss, his left at the barrel, and his eye on the horseman,
answered curtly, "Sir."

"There is nothing to apprehend.  I belong to Tellson's Bank.
You must know Tellson's Bank in London.  I am going to Paris
on business.  A crown to drink.  I may read this?"

"If so be as you're quick, sir."

He opened it in the light of the coach-lamp on that side,
and read--first to himself and then aloud:  "`Wait at Dover for
Mam'selle.' It's not long, you see, guard.  Jerry, say that my
answer was, RECALLED TO LIFE."

Jerry started in his saddle.  "That's a Blazing strange answer, too,"
said he, at his hoarsest.

"Take that message back, and they will know that I received this,
as well as if I wrote.  Make the best of your way.  Good night."

With those words the passenger opened the coach-door and got in;
not at all assisted by his fellow-passengers, who had
expeditiously secreted their watches and purses in their boots,
and were now making a general pretence of being asleep.  With no
more definite purpose than to escape the hazard of originating
any other kind of action.

The coach lumbered on again, with heavier wreaths of mist closing
round it as it began the descent. The guard soon replaced his
blunderbuss in his arm-chest, and, having looked to the rest of its
contents, and having looked to the supplementary pistols that he wore
in his belt, looked to a smaller chest beneath his seat, in which
there were a few smith's tools, a couple of torches, and a tinder-box.
For he was furnished with that completeness that if the coach-lamps
had been blown and stormed out, which did occasionally happen, he had
only to shut himself up inside, keep the flint and steel sparks well
off the straw, and get a light with tolerable safety and ease (if he
were lucky) in five minutes.

"Tom!" softly over the coach roof.

"Hallo, Joe."

"Did you hear the message?"

"I did, Joe."

"What did you make of it, Tom?"

"Nothing at all, Joe."

"That's a coincidence, too," the guard mused, "for I made the
same of it myself."

Jerry, left alone in the mist and darkness, dismounted meanwhile,
not only to ease his spent horse, but to wipe the mud from his
face, and shake the wet out of his hat-brim, which might be
capable of holding about half a gallon.  After standing with the
bridle over his heavily-splashed arm, until the wheels of the
mail were no longer within hearing and the night was quite still
again, he turned to walk down the hill.

"After that there gallop from Temple Bar, old lady, I won't trust
your fore-legs till I get you on the level," said this hoarse
messenger, glancing at his mare.  "`Recalled to life.' That's a
Blazing strange message.  Much of that wouldn't do for you, Jerry!
I say, Jerry!  You'd be in a Blazing bad way, if recalling to life was
to come into fashion, Jerry!"



III

The Night Shadows


A Wonderful fact to reflect upon, that every human creature is
constituted to be that profound secret and mystery to every other.
A solemn consideration, when I enter a great city by night, that
every one of those darkly clustered houses encloses its own secret;
that every room in every one of them encloses its own secret; that
every beating heart in the hundreds of thousands of breasts there,
is, in some of its imaginings, a secret to the heart nearest it!
Something of the awfulness, even of Death itself, is referable to
this.  No more can I turn the leaves of this dear book that I loved,
and vainly hope in time to read it all.  No more can I look into the
depths of this unfathomable water, wherein, as momentary lights
glanced into it, I have had glimpses of buried treasure and other
things submerged.  It was appointed that the book should shut with a
a spring, for ever and for ever, when I had read but a page.  It was
appointed that the water should be locked in an eternal frost, when
the light was playing on its surface, and I stood in ignorance on the
shore.  My friend is dead, my neighbour is dead, my love, the darling
of my soul, is dead; it is the inexorable consolidation and
perpetuation of the secret that was always in that individuality,
and which I shall carry in mine to my life's end.  In any of the
burial-places of this city through which I pass, is there a sleeper
more inscrutable than its busy inhabitants are, in their innermost
personality, to me, or than I am to them?

As to this, his natural and not to be alienated inheritance,
the messenger on horseback had exactly the same possessions as
the King, the first Minister of State, or the richest merchant
in London.  So with the three passengers shut up in the narrow
compass of one lumbering old mail coach; they were mysteries to
one another, as complete as if each had been in his own coach and
six, or his own coach and sixty, with the breadth of a county
between him and the next.

The messenger rode back at an easy trot, stopping pretty often at
ale-houses by the way to drink, but evincing a tendency to keep his
own counsel, and to keep his hat cocked over his eyes.  He had eyes
that assorted very well with that decoration, being of a surface
black, with no depth in the colour or form, and much too near
together--as if they were afraid of being found out in something,
singly, if they kept too far apart.  They had a sinister expression,
under an old cocked-hat like a three-cornered spittoon, and over a
great muffler for the chin and throat, which descended nearly to the
wearer's knees.  When he stopped for drink, he moved this muffler
with his left hand, only while he poured his liquor in with his
right; as soon as that was done, he muffled again.

"No, Jerry, no!" said the messenger, harping on one theme as he rode.
"It wouldn't do for you, Jerry.  Jerry, you honest tradesman, it
wouldn't suit YOUR line of business!  Recalled--!  Bust me if I
don't think he'd been a drinking!"

His message perplexed his mind to that degree that he was fain,
several times, to take off his hat to scratch his head.  Except on
the crown, which was raggedly bald, he had stiff, black hair,
standing jaggedly all over it, and growing down hill almost to his
broad, blunt nose.  It was so like Smith's work, so much more like
the top of a strongly spiked wall than a head of hair, that the best
of players at leap-frog might have declined him, as the most
dangerous man in the world to go over.

While he trotted back with the message he was to deliver to the night
watchman in his box at the door of Tellson's Bank, by Temple Bar, who
was to deliver it to greater authorities within, the shadows of the
night took such shapes to him as arose out of the message, and took
such shapes to the mare as arose out of HER private topics of
uneasiness.  They seemed to be numerous, for she shied at every
shadow on the road.

What time, the mail-coach lumbered, jolted, rattled, and bumped upon
its tedious way, with its three fellow-inscrutables inside.  To whom,
likewise, the shadows of the night revealed themselves, in the forms
their dozing eyes and wandering thoughts suggested.

Tellson's Bank had a run upon it in the mail.  As the bank passenger--
with an arm drawn through the leathern strap, which did what lay in
it to keep him from pounding against the next passenger, and driving
him into his corner, whenever the coach got a special jolt--nodded in
his place, with half-shut eyes, the little coach-windows, and the
coach-lamp dimly gleaming through them, and the bulky bundle of
opposite passenger, became the bank, and did a great stroke of business.
The rattle of the harness was the chink of money, and more drafts
were honoured in five minutes than even Tellson's, with all its
foreign and home connection, ever paid in thrice the time.  Then the
strong-rooms underground, at Tellson's, with such of their valuable
stores and secrets as were known to the passenger (and it was not a
little that he knew about them), opened before him, and he went in
among them with the great keys and the feebly-burning candle, and
found them safe, and strong, and sound, and still, just as he had
last seen them.

But, though the bank was almost always with him, and though the coach
(in a confused way, like the presence of pain under an opiate) was
always with him, there was another current of impression that never
ceased to run, all through the night.  He was on his way to dig some
one out of a grave.

Now, which of the multitude of faces that showed themselves before
him was the true face of the buried person, the shadows of the night
did not indicate; but they were all the faces of a man of five-and-
forty by years, and they differed principally in the passions they
expressed, and in the ghastliness of their worn and wasted state.
Pride, contempt, defiance, stubbornness, submission, lamentation,
succeeded one another; so did varieties of sunken cheek, cadaverous
colour, emaciated hands and figures.  But the face was in the main
one face, and every head was prematurely white.  A hundred times the
dozing passenger inquired of this spectre:

"Buried how long?"

The answer was always the same:  "Almost eighteen years."

"You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?"

"Long ago."

"You know that you are recalled to life?"

"They tell me so."

"I hope you care to live?"

"I can't say."

"Shall I show her to you?  Will you come and see her?"

The answers to this question were various and contradictory.
Sometimes the broken reply was, "Wait!  It would kill me if I saw
her too soon."  Sometimes, it was given in a tender rain of tears,
and then it was, "Take me to her."  Sometimes it was staring and
bewildered, and then it was, "I don't know her.  I don't understand."

After such imaginary discourse, the passenger in his fancy would dig,
and dig, dig--now with a spade, now with a great key, now with his
hands--to dig this wretched creature out.  Got out at last, with
earth hanging about his face and hair, he would suddenly fan away to
dust.  The passenger would then start to himself, and lower the
window, to get the reality of mist and rain on his cheek.

Yet even when his eyes were opened on the mist and rain, on the
moving patch of light from the lamps, and the hedge at the roadside
retreating by jerks, the night shadows outside the coach would fall
into the train of the night shadows within.  The real Banking-house
by Temple Bar, the real business of the past day, the real strong
rooms, the real express sent after him, and the real message returned,
would all be there.  Out of the midst of them, the ghostly face would
rise, and he would accost it again.

"Buried how long?"

"Almost eighteen years."

"I hope you care to live?"

"I can't say."

Dig--dig--dig--until an impatient movement from one of the two
passengers would admonish him to pull up the window, draw his arm
securely through the leathern strap, and speculate upon the two
slumbering forms, until his mind lost its hold of them, and they
again slid away into the bank and the grave.

"Buried how long?"

"Almost eighteen years."

"You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?"

"Long ago."

The words were still in his hearing as just spoken--distinctly in his
hearing as ever spoken words had been in his life--when the weary
passenger started to the consciousness of daylight, and found that
the shadows of the night were gone.

He lowered the window, and looked out at the rising sun.  There was a
ridge of ploughed land, with a plough upon it where it had been left
last night when the horses were unyoked; beyond, a quiet coppice-wood,
in which many leaves of burning red and golden yellow still remained
upon the trees.  Though the earth was cold and wet, the sky was
clear, and the sun rose bright, placid, and beautiful.

"Eighteen years!" said the passenger, looking at the sun.
"Gracious Creator of day!  To be buried alive for eighteen years!"



IV

The Preparation


When the mail got successfully to Dover, in the course of the
forenoon, the head drawer at the Royal George Hotel opened the
coach-door as his custom was.  He did it with some flourish of
ceremony, for a mail journey from London in winter was an achievement
to congratulate an adventurous traveller upon.

By that time, there was only one adventurous traveller left be
congratulated:  for the two others had been set down at their
respective roadside destinations.  The mildewy inside of the coach,
with its damp and dirty straw, its disageeable smell, and its
obscurity, was rather like a larger dog-kennel.  Mr. Lorry, the
passenger, shaking himself out of it in chains of straw, a tangle of
shaggy wrapper, flapping hat, and muddy legs, was rather like a
larger sort of dog.

"There will be a packet to Calais, tomorrow, drawer?"

"Yes, sir, if the weather holds and the wind sets tolerable fair.
The tide will serve pretty nicely at about two in the afternoon,
sir.  Bed, sir?"

"I shall not go to bed till night; but I want a bedroom, and a barber."

"And then breakfast, sir?  Yes, sir.  That way, sir, if you please.
Show Concord!  Gentleman's valise and hot water to Concord.  Pull off
gentleman's boots in Concord. (You will find a fine sea-coal fire,
sir.) Fetch barber to Concord.  Stir about there, now, for Concord!"

The Concord bed-chamber being always assigned to a passenger by the
mail, and passengers by the mail being always heavily wrapped up from
bead to foot, the room had the odd interest for the establishment of
the Royal George, that although but one kind of man was seen to go
into it, all kinds and varieties of men came out of it. Consequently,
another drawer, and two porters, and several maids and the landlady,
were all loitering by accident at various points of the road between
the Concord and the coffee-room, when a gentleman of sixty, formally
dressed in a brown suit of clothes, pretty well worn, but very well
kept, with large square cuffs and large flaps to the pockets, passed
along on his way to his breakfast.

The coffee-room had no other occupant, that forenoon, than the
gentleman in brown.  His breakfast-table was drawn before the fire,
and as he sat, with its light shining on him, waiting for the meal,
he sat so still, that he might have been sitting for his portrait.

Very orderly and methodical he looked, with a hand on each knee, and
a loud watch ticking a sonorous sermon under his flapped waist-coat,
as though it pitted its gravity and longevity against the levity and
evanescence of the brisk fire.  He had a good leg, and was a little
vain of it, for his brown stockings fitted sleek and close, and were
of a fine texture; his shoes and buckles, too, though plain, were
trim.  He wore an odd little sleek crisp flaxen wig, setting very
close to his head:  which wig, it is to be presumed, was made of hair,
but which looked far more as though it were spun from filaments of
silk or glass.  His linen, though not of a fineness in accordance
with his stockings, was as white as the tops of the waves that broke
upon the neighbouring beach, or the specks of sail that glinted in
the sunlight far at sea.  A face habitually suppressed and quieted,
was still lighted up under the quaint wig by a pair of moist bright
eyes that it must have cost their owner, in years gone by, some pains
to drill to the composed and reserved expression of Tellson's Bank.
He had a healthy colour in his cheeks, and his face, though lined,
bore few traces of anxiety.  But, perhaps the confidential bachelor
clerks in Tellson's Bank were principally occupied with the cares of
other people; and perhaps second-hand cares, like second-hand
clothes, come easily off and on.

Completing his resemblance to a man who was sitting for his portrait,
Mr. Lorry dropped off to sleep.  The arrival of his breakfast roused
him, and he said to the drawer, as he moved his chair to it:

"I wish accommodation prepared for a young lady who may come here at
any time to-day.  She may ask for Mr. Jarvis Lorry, or she may only
ask for a gentleman from Tellson's Bank.  Please to let me know."

"Yes, sir.  Tellson's Bank in London, sir?"

"Yes."

"Yes, sir.  We have oftentimes the honour to entertain your gentlemen
in their travelling backwards and forwards betwixt London and Paris,
sir.  A vast deal of travelling, sir, in Tellson and Company's House."

"Yes.  We are quite a French House, as well as an English one."

"Yes, sir.  Not much in the habit of such travelling yourself,
I think, sir?"

"Not of late years.  It is fifteen years since we--since I--
came last from France."

"Indeed, sir?  That was before my time here, sir.  Before our people's
time here, sir.  The George was in other hands at that time, sir."

"I believe so."

"But I would hold a pretty wager, sir, that a House like Tellson and
Company was flourishing, a matter of fifty, not to speak of fifteen
years ago?"

"You might treble that, and say a hundred and fifty, yet not be far
from the truth."

"Indeed, sir!"

Rounding his mouth and both his eyes, as he stepped backward from the
table, the waiter shifted his napkin from his right arm to his left,
dropped into a comfortable attitude, and stood surveying the guest
while he ate and drank, as from an observatory or watchtower.
According to the immemorial usage of waiters in all ages.

When Mr. Lorry had finished his breakfast, he went out for a stroll
on the beach.  The little narrow, crooked town of Dover hid itself
away from the beach, and ran its head into the chalk cliffs, like a
marine ostrich.  The beach was a desert of heaps of sea and stones
tumbling wildly about, and the sea did what it liked, and what it
liked was destruction.  It thundered at the town, and thundered at
the cliffs, and brought the coast down, madly.  The air among the
houses was of so strong a piscatory flavour that one might have
supposed sick fish went up to be dipped in it, as sick people went
down to be dipped in the sea.  A little fishing was done in the port,
and a quantity of strolling about by night, and looking seaward:
particularly at those times when the tide made, and was near flood.
Small tradesmen, who did no business whatever, sometimes unaccountably
realised large fortunes, and it was remarkable that nobody in the
neighbourhood could endure a lamplighter.

As the day declined into the afternoon, and the air, which had been
at intervals clear enough to allow the French coast to be seen,
became again charged with mist and vapour, Mr. Lorry's thoughts
seemed to cloud too.  When it was dark, and he sat before the
coffee-room fire, awaiting his dinner as he had awaited his breakfast,
his mind was busily digging, digging, digging, in the live red coals.

A bottle of good claret after dinner does a digger in the red coals
no harm, otherwise than as it has a tendency to throw him out of
work.  Mr. Lorry had been idle a long time, and had just poured out
his last glassful of wine with as complete an appearance of
satisfaction as is ever to be found in an elderly gentleman of a
fresh complexion who has got to the end of a bottle, when a rattling
of wheels came up the narrow street, and rumbled into the inn-yard.

He set down his glass untouched.  "This is Mam'selle!" said he.

In a very few minutes the waiter came in to announce that Miss
Manette had arrived from London, and would be happy to see the
gentleman from Tellson's.

"So soon?"

Miss Manette had taken some refreshment on the road, and required
none then, and was extremely anxious to see the gentleman from
Tellson's immediately, if it suited his pleasure and convenience.

The gentleman from Tellson's had nothing left for it but to empty his
glass with an air of stolid desperation, settle his odd little flaxen
wig at the ears, and follow the waiter to Miss Manette's apartment.
It was a large, dark room, furnished in a funereal manner with black
horsehair, and loaded with heavy dark tables.  These had been oiled
and oiled, until the two tall candles on the table in the middle of
the room were gloomily reflected on every leaf; as if THEY were
buried, in deep graves of black mahogany, and no light to speak of
could be expected from them until they were dug out.

The obscurity was so difficult to penetrate that Mr. Lorry,
picking his way over the well-worn Turkey carpet, supposed

Miss Manette to be, for the moment, in some adjacent room, until,
having got past the two tall candles, he saw standing to receive him
by the table between them and the fire, a young lady of not more than
seventeen, in a riding-cloak, and still holding her straw travelling-
hat by its ribbon in her hand.  As his eyes rested on a short, slight,
pretty figure, a quantity of golden hair, a pair of blue eyes that
met his own with an inquiring look, and a forehead with a singular
capacity (remembering how young and smooth it was), of rifting and
knitting itself into an expression that was not quite one of perplexity,
or wonder, or alarm, or merely of a bright fixed attention, though it
included all the four expressions-as his eyes rested on these things,
a sudden vivid likeness passed before him, of a child whom he had
held in his anus on the passage across that very Channel, one cold
time, when the hail drifted heavily and the sea ran high.  The
likeness passed away, like a breath along the surface of the gaunt
pier-glass behind her, on the frame of which, a hospital procession
of negro cupids, several headless and all cripples, were offering
black baskets of Dead Sea fruit to black divinities of the feminine
gender-and he made his formal bow to Miss Manette.

"Pray take a seat, sir."  In a very clear and pleasant young voice;
a little foreign in its accent, but a very little indeed.

"I kiss your hand, miss," said Mr. Lorry, with the manners of an
earlier date, as he made his formal bow again, and took his seat.

"I received a letter from the Bank, sir, yesterday, informing me that
some intelligence--or discovery--"

"The word is not material, miss; either word will do."

"--respecting the small property of my poor father, whom I never
saw--so long dead--"

Mr. Lorry moved in his chair, and cast a troubled look towards the
hospital procession of negro cupids.  As if THEY had any help for
anybody in their absurd baskets!

"--rendered it necessary that I should go to Paris, there to
communicate with a gentleman of the Bank, so good as to be despatched
to Paris for the purpose."

"Myself."

"As I was prepared to hear, sir."

She curtseyed to him (young ladies made curtseys in those days), with
a pretty desire to convey to him that she felt how much older and
wiser he was than she.  He made her another bow.

"I replied to the Bank, sir, that as it was considered necessary, by
those who know, and who are so kind as to advise me, that I should go
to France, and that as I am an orphan and have no friend who could go
with me, I should esteem it highly if I might be permitted to place
myself, during the journey, under that worthy gentleman's protection.
The gentleman had left London, but I think a messenger was sent after
him to beg the favour of his waiting for me here."

"I was happy," said Mr. Lorry, "to be entrusted with the charge.
I shall be more happy to execute it."

"Sir, I thank you indeed.  I thank you very gratefully.  It was told
me by the Bank that the gentleman would explain to me the details of
the business, and that I must prepare myself to find them of a
surprising nature.  I have done my best to prepare myself, and I
naturally have a strong and eager interest to know what they are."

"Naturally," said Mr. Lorry.  "Yes--I--"

After a pause, he added, again settling the crisp flaxen wig at the ears,
"It is very difficult to begin."

He did not begin, but, in his indecision, met her glance.  The young
forehead lifted itself into that singular expression--but it was
pretty and characteristic, besides being singular--and she raised
her hand, as if with an involuntary action she caught at, or stayed
some passing shadow.

"Are you quite a stranger to me, sir?"

"Am I not?"  Mr. Lorry opened his hands, and extended them outwards
with an argumentative smile.

Between the eyebrows and just over the little feminine nose, the line
of which was as delicate and fine as it was possible to be, the
expression deepened itself as she took her seat thoughtfully in the
chair by which she had hitherto remained standing.  He watched her as
she mused, and the moment she raised her eyes again, went on:

"In your adopted country, I presume, I cannot do better than address
you as a young English lady, Miss Manette?"

"If you please, sir."

"Miss Manette, I am a man of business.  I have a business charge to
acquit myself of.  In your reception of it, don't heed me any more
than if I was a speaking machine-truly, I am not much else.  I will,
with your leave, relate to you, miss, the story of one of our
customers."

"Story!"

He seemed wilfully to mistake the word she had repeated, when he
added, in a hurry, "Yes, customers; in the banking business we
usually call our connection our customers.  He was a French
gentleman; a scientific gentleman; a man of great acquirements--
a Doctor."

"Not of Beauvais?"

"Why, yes, of Beauvais.  Like Monsieur Manette, your father,
the gentleman was of Beauvais.  Like Monsieur Manette, your father,
the gentleman was of repute in Paris.  I had the honour of knowing
him there.  Our relations were business relations, but confidential.
I was at that time in our French House, and had been--oh! twenty years."

"At that time--I may ask, at what time, sir?"

"I speak, miss, of twenty years ago.  He married--an English
lady--and I was one of the trustees.  His affairs, like the affairs
of many other French gentlemen and French families, were entirely in
Tellson's hands.  In a similar way I am, or I have been, trustee of
one kind or other for scores of our customers.  These are mere business
relations, miss; there is no friendship in them, no particular
interest, nothing like sentiment.  I have passed from one to another,
in the course of my business life, just as I pass from one of our
customers to another in the course of my business day; in short, I
have no feelings; I am a mere machine.  To go on--"

"But this is my father's story, sir; and I begin to think"
--the curiously roughened forehead was very intent upon him--"that
when I was left an orphan through my mother's surviving my father
only two years, it was you who brought me to England.  I am almost
sure it was you."

Mr. Lorry took the hesitating little hand that confidingly advanced
to take his, and he put it with some ceremony to his lips.  He then
conducted the young lady straightway to her chair again, and, holding
the chair-back with his left hand, and using his right by turns to
rub his chin, pull his wig at the ears, or point what he said, stood
looking down into her face while she sat looking up into his.

"Miss Manette, it WAS I. And you will see how truly I spoke of
myself just now, in saying I had no feelings, and that all the
relations I hold with my fellow-creatures are mere business
relations, when you reflect that I have never seen you since.
No; you have been the ward of Tellson's House since, and I have been
busy with the other business of Tellson's House since.  Feelings!
I have no time for them, no chance of them.  I pass my whole life,
miss, in turning an immense pecuniary Mangle."

After this odd description of his daily routine of employment, Mr.
Lorry flattened his flaxen wig upon his head with both hands (which
was most unnecessary, for nothing could be flatter than its shining
surface was before), and resumed his former attitude.

"So far, miss (as you have remarked), this is the story of your
gretted father.  Now comes the difference.  If your father had not
died when he did--Don't be frightened!  How you start!"

She did, indeed, start.  And she caught his wrist with both her hands.

"Pray," said Mr. Lorry, in a soothing tone, bringing his left hand
from the back of the chair to lay it on the supplicatory fingers that
clasped him in so violent a tremble:  "pray control your agitation--
a matter of business.  As I was saying--"

Her look so discomposed him that he stopped, wandered, and began anew:

"As I was saying; if Monsieur Manette had not died; if he had
suddenly and silently disappeared; if he had been spirited away;
if it had not been difficult to guess to what dreadful place, though
no art could trace him; if he had an enemy in some compatriot who
could exercise a privilege that I in my own time have known the boldest
people afraid to speak of in a whisper, across the water there; for
instance, the privilege of filling up blank forms for the consignment
of any one to the oblivion of a prison for any length of time; if his
wife had implored the king, the queen, the court, the clergy, for any
tidings of him, and all quite in vain;--then the history of your father
would have been the history of this unfortunate gentleman, the Doctor
of Beauvais."

"I entreat you to tell me more, sir."

"I will.  I am going to.  You can bear it?"

"I can bear anything but the uncertainty you leave me in at this moment."

"You speak collectedly, and you--ARE collected.  That's good!"
(Though his manner was less satisfied than his words.) "A matter of
business.  Regard it as a matter of business-business that must be
done.  Now if this doctor's wife, though a lady of great courage and
spirit, had suffered so intensely from this cause before her little
child was born--"

"The little child was a daughter, sir."

"A daughter.  A-a-matter of business--don't be distressed.  Miss,
if the poor lady had suffered so intensely before her little child
was born, that she came to the determination of sparing the poor
child the inheritance of any part of the agony she had known the
pains of, by rearing her in the belief that her father was dead--
No, don't kneel!  In Heaven's name why should you kneel to me!"

"For the truth. O dear, good, compassionate sir, for the truth!"

"A-a matter of business.  You confuse me, and how can I transact
business if I am confused?  Let us be clear-headed.  If you could
kindly mention now, for instance, what nine times ninepence are,
or how many shillings in twenty guineas, it would be so encouraging.
I should be so much more at my ease about your state of mind."

Without directly answering to this appeal, she sat so still when
he had very gently raised her, and the hands that had not ceased
to clasp his wrists were so much more steady than they had been,
that she communicated some reassurance to Mr. Jarvis Lorry.

"That's right, that's right.  Courage!  Business!  You have business
before you; useful business.  Miss Manette, your mother took this
course with you.  And when she died--I believe broken-hearted--
having never slackened her unavailing search for your father,
she left you, at two years old, to grow to be blooming, beautiful,
and happy, without the dark cloud upon you of living in uncertainty
whether your father soon wore his heart out in prison, or wasted
there through many lingering years."

As he said the words he looked down, with an admiring pity, on the
flowing golden hair; as if he pictured to himself that it might have
been already tinged with grey.

"You know that your parents had no great possession, and that what
they had was secured to your mother and to you.  There has been no
new discovery, of money, or of any other property; but--"

He felt his wrist held closer, and he stopped.  The expression in the
forehead, which had so particularly attracted his notice, and which
was now immovable, had deepened into one of pain and horror.

"But he has been-been found.  He is alive.  Greatly changed, it is
too probable; almost a wreck, it is possible; though we will hope the
best.  Still, alive.  Your father has been taken to the house of an
old servant in Paris, and we are going there:  I, to identify him if
I can:  you, to restore him to life, love, duty, rest, comfort."

A shiver ran through her frame, and from it through his.  She said,
in a low, distinct, awe-stricken voice, as if she were saying it in a
dream,

"I am going to see his Ghost!  It will be his Ghost--not him!"

Mr. Lorry quietly chafed the hands that held his arm.  "There, there,
there!  See now, see now! The best and the worst are known to you, now.
You are well on your way to the poor wronged gentleman, and, with a fair
sea voyage, and a fair land journey, you will be soon at his dear side."

She repeated in the same tone, sunk to a whisper, "I have been free,
I have been happy, yet his Ghost has never haunted me!"

"Only one thing more," said Mr. Lorry, laying stress upon it as a
wholesome means of enforcing her attention:  "he has been found under
another name; his own, long forgotten or long concealed.  It would be
worse than useless now to inquire which; worse than useless to seek
to know whether he has been for years overlooked, or always designedly
held prisoner.  It would be worse than useless now to make any inquiries,
because it would be dangerous.  Better not to mention the subject,
anywhere or in any way, and to remove him--for a while at all events--
out of France.  Even I, safe as an Englishman, and even Tellson's,
important as they are to French credit, avoid all naming of the
matter.  I carry about me, not a scrap of writing openly referring to
it.  This is a secret service altogether.  My credentials, entries,
and memoranda, are all comprehended in the one line, `Recalled to
Life;' which may mean anything.  But what is the matter!  She doesn't
notice a word!  Miss Manette!"

Perfectly still and silent, and not even fallen back in her chair,
she sat under his hand, utterly insensible; with her eyes open and
fixed upon him, and with that last expression looking as if it were
carved or branded into her forehead.  So close was her hold upon his
arm, that he feared to detach himself lest he should hurt her;
therefore he called out loudly for assistance without moving.

A wild-looking woman, whom even in his agitation, Mr. Lorry observed
to be all of a red colour, and to have red hair, and to be dressed in
some extraordinary tight-fitting fashion, and to have on her head a
most wonderful bonnet like a Grenadier wooden measure, and good
measure too, or a great Stilton cheese, came running into the room in
advance of the inn servants, and soon settled the question of his
detachment from the poor young lady, by laying a brawny hand upon his
chest, and sending him flying back against the nearest wall.

("I really think this must be a man!" was Mr. Lorry's breathless
reflection, simultaneously with his coming against the wall.)

"Why, look at you all!" bawled this figure, addressing the inn
servants.  "Why don't you go and fetch things, instead of standing
there staring at me?  I am not so much to look at, am I?  Why don't
you go and fetch things?  I'll let you know, if you don't bring
smelling-salts, cold water, and vinegar, quick, I will."

There was an immediate dispersal for these restoratives, and she
softly laid the patient on a sofa, and tended her with great skill
and gentleness:  calling her "my precious!" and "my bird!" and spreading
her golden hair aside over her shoulders with great pride and care.

"And you in brown!" she said, indignantly turning to Mr. Lorry;
couldn't you tell her what you had to tell her, without frightening
her to death?  Look at her, with her pretty pale face and her cold
hands.  Do you call THAT being a Banker?"

Mr. Lorry was so exceedingly disconcerted by a question so hard to
answer, that he could only look on, at a distance, with much feebler
sympathy and humility, while the strong woman, having banished the
inn servants under the mysterious penalty of "letting them know"
something not mentioned if they stayed there, staring, recovered her
charge by a regular series of gradations, and coaxed her to lay her
drooping head upon her shoulder.

"I hope she will do well now," said Mr. Lorry.

"No thanks to you in brown, if she does.  My darling pretty!"

"I hope," said Mr. Lorry, after another pause of feeble sympathy and
humility, "that you accompany Miss Manette to France?"

"A likely thing, too!" replied the strong woman.  "If it was ever
intended that I should go across salt water, do you suppose
Providence would have cast my lot in an island?"

This being another question hard to answer, Mr. Jarvis Lorry withdrew
to consider it.



V

The Wine-shop


A large cask of wine had been dropped and broken, in the street.
The accident had happened in getting it out of a cart; the cask had
tumbled out with a run, the hoops had burst, and it lay on the stones
just outside the door of the wine-shop, shattered like a
walnut-shell.

All the people within reach had suspended their business, or their
idleness, to run to the spot and drink the wine.  The rough,
irregular stones of the street, pointing every way, and designed,
one might have thought, expressly to lame all living creatures that
approached them, had dammed it into little pools; these were surrounded,
each by its own jostling group or crowd, according to its size.
Some men kneeled down, made scoops of their two hands joined, and
sipped, or tried to help women, who bent over their shoulders, to
sip, before the wine had all run out between their fingers.  Others,
men and women, dipped in the puddles with little mugs of mutilated
earthenware, or even with handkerchiefs from women's heads, which
were squeezed dry into infants' mouths; others made small mud-
embankments, to stem the wine as it ran; others, directed by
lookers-on up at high windows, darted here and there, to cut off
little streams of wine that started away in new directions; others
devoted themselves to the sodden and lee-dyed pieces of the cask,
licking, and even champing the moister wine-rotted fragments with
eager relish.  There was no drainage to carry off the wine, and not
only did it all get taken up, but so much mud got taken up along with
it, that there might have been a scavenger in the street, if anybody
acquainted with it could have believed in such a miraculous presence.

A shrill sound of laughter and of amused voices--voices of men,
women, and children--resounded in the street while this wine game
lasted.  There was little roughness in the sport, and much playfulness.
There was a special companionship in it, an observable inclination on
the part of every one to join some other one, which led, especially
among the luckier or lighter-hearted, to frolicsome embraces,
drinking of healths, shaking of hands, and even joining of hands and
dancing, a dozen together.  When the wine was gone, and the places
where it had been most abundant were raked into a gridiron-pattern by
fingers, these demonstrations ceased, as suddenly as they had broken
out.  The man who had left his saw sticking in the firewood he was
cutting, set it in motion again; the women who had left on a door-step
the little pot of hot ashes, at which she had been trying to soften
the pain in her own starved fingers and toes, or in those of her
child, returned to it; men with bare arms, matted locks, and cadaverous
faces, who had emerged into the winter light from cellars, moved
away, to descend again; and a gloom gathered on the scene that
appeared more natural to it than sunshine.

The wine was red wine, and had stained the ground of the narrow
street in the suburb of Saint Antoine, in Paris, where it was
spilled.  It had stained many hands, too, and many faces, and many
naked feet, and many wooden shoes.  The hands of the man who sawed
the wood, left red marks on the billets; and the forehead of the
woman who nursed her baby, was stained with the stain of the old rag
she wound about her head again.  Those who had been greedy with the
staves of the cask, had acquired a tigerish smear about the mouth;
and one tall joker so besmirched, his head more out of a long squalid
bag of a nightcap than in it, scrawled upon a wall with his finger
dipped in muddy wine-lees--BLOOD.

The time was to come, when that wine too would be spilled on the
street-stones, and when the stain of it would be red upon many there.

And now that the cloud settled on Saint Antoine, which a momentary
gleam had driven from his sacred countenance, the darkness of it was
heavy-cold, dirt, sickness, ignorance, and want, were the lords in
waiting on the saintly presence-nobles of great power all of them;
but, most especially the last.  Samples of a people that had
undergone a terrible grinding and regrinding in the mill, and
certainly not in the fabulous mill which ground old people young,
shivered at every corner, passed in and out at every doorway, looked
from every window, fluttered in every vestige of a garment that the
wind shook.  The mill which had worked them down, was the mill that
grinds young people old; the children had ancient faces and grave
voices; and upon them, and upon the grown faces, and ploughed into
every furrow of age and coming up afresh, was the sigh, Hunger.  It
was prevalent everywhere.  Hunger was pushed out of the tall houses,
in the wretched clothing that hung upon poles and lines; Hunger was
patched into them with straw and rag and wood and paper; Hunger was
repeated in every fragment of the small modicum of firewood that the
man sawed off; Hunger stared down from the smokeless chimneys, and
started up from the filthy street that had no offal, among its refuse,
of anything to eat.  Hunger was the inscription on the baker's
shelves, written in every small loaf of his scanty stock of bad
bread; at the sausage-shop, in every dead-dog preparation that was
offered for sale.  Hunger rattled its dry bones among the roasting
chestnuts in the turned cylinder; Hunger was shred into atomics in
every farthing porringer of husky chips of potato, fried with some
reluctant drops of oil.

Its abiding place was in all things fitted to it.  A narrow winding
street, full of offence and stench, with other narrow winding streets
diverging, all peopled by rags and nightcaps, and all smelling of
rags and nightcaps, and all visible things with a brooding look upon
them that looked ill.  In the hunted air of the people there was yet
some wild-beast thought of the possibility of turning at bay. Depressed
and slinking though they were, eyes of fire were not wanting among
them; nor compressed lips, white with what they suppressed; nor
foreheads knitted into the likeness of the gallows-rope they mused
about enduring, or inflicting.  The trade signs (and they were almost
as many as the shops) were, all, grim illustrations of Want.  The
butcher and the porkman painted up, only the leanest scrags of meat;
the baker, the coarsest of meagre loaves.  The people rudely pictured
as drinking in the wine-shops, croaked over their scanty measures of
thin wine and beer, and were gloweringly confidential together.
Nothing was represented in a flourishing condition, save tools and
weapons; but, the cutler's knives and axes were sharp and bright, the
smith's hammers were heavy, and the gunmaker's stock was murderous.
The crippling stones of the pavement, with their many little
reservoirs of mud and water, had no footways, but broke off abruptly
at the doors.  The kennel, to make amends, ran down the middle of the
street--when it ran at all:  which was only after heavy rains, and
then it ran, by many eccentric fits, into the houses.  Across the
streets, at wide intervals, one clumsy lamp was slung by a rope and
pulley; at night, when the lamplighter had let these down, and lighted,
and hoisted them again, a feeble grove of dim wicks swung in a sickly
manner overhead, as if they were at sea.  Indeed they were at sea,
and the ship and crew were in peril of tempest.

For, the time was to come, when the gaunt scarecrows of that region
should have watched the lamplighter, in their idleness and hunger,
so long, as to conceive the idea of improving on his method, and
hauling up men by those ropes and pulleys, to flare upon the
darkness of their condition.  But, the time was not come yet; and
every wind that blew over France shook the rags of the scarecrows
in vain, for the birds, fine of song and feather, took no warning.

The wine-shop was a corner shop, better than most others in its
appearance and degree, and the master of the wine-shop had stood
outside it, in a yellow waistcoat and green breeches, looking on at
the struggle for the lost wine.  "It's not my affair," said he,
with a final shrug of the shoulders.  "The people from the market
did it.  Ut them bring another."

There, his eyes happening to catch the tall joker writing up his
joke, he called to him across the way:

"Say, then, my Gaspard, what do you do there?"

The fellow pointed to his joke with immense significance, as is often
the way with his tribe.  It missed its mark, and completely failed,
as is often the way with his tribe too.

"What now?  Are you a subject for the mad hospital?" said the
wine-shop keeper, crossing the road, and obliterating the jest with
a handful of mud, picked up for the purpose, and smeared over it.
"Why do you write in the public streets?  Is there--tell me thou--is
there no other place to write such words in?"

In his expostulation he dropped his cleaner hand (perhaps accidentally,
perhaps not) upon the joker's heart.  The joker rapped it with his
own, took a nimble spring upward, and came down in a fantastic
dancing attitude, with one of his stained shoes jerked off his foot
into his hand, and held out.  A joker of an extremely, not to say
wolfishly practical character, he looked, under those circumstances.

"Put it on, put it on," said the other.  "Call wine, wine; and finish
there."  With that advice, he wiped his soiled hand upon the joker's
dress, such as it was--quite deliberately, as having dirtied the hand
on his account; and then recrossed the road and entered the wine-shop.

This wine-shop keeper was a bull-necked, martial-looking man of
thirty, and he should have been of a hot temperament, for, although
it was a bitter day, he wore no coat, but carried one slung over his
shoulder.  His shirt-sleeves were rolled up, too, and his brown arms
were bare to the elbows.  Neither did he wear anything more on his
head than his own crisply-curling short dark hair.  He was a dark man
altogether, with good eyes and a good bold breadth between them.
Good-humoured looking on the whole, but implacable-looking, too;
evidently a man of a strong resolution and a set purpose; a man not
desirable to be met, rushing down a narrow pass with a gulf on either
side, for nothing would turn the man.

Madame Defarge, his wife, sat in the shop behind the counter as he
came in.  Madame Defarge was a stout woman of about his own age, with
a watchful eye that seldom seemed to look at anything, a large hand
heavily ringed, a steady face, strong features, and great composure
of manner.  There was a character about Madame Defarge, from which
one might have predicated that she did not often make mistakes against
herself in any of the reckonings over which she presided.  Madame
Defarge being sensitive to cold, was wrapped in fur, and had a
quantity of bright shawl twined about her head, though not to the
concealment of her large earrings.  Her knitting was before her, but
she had laid it down to pick her teeth with a toothpick.  Thus
engaged, with her right elbow supported by her left hand, Madame
Defarge said nothing when her lord came in, but coughed just one
grain of cough.  This, in combination with the lifting of her darkly
defined eyebrows over her toothpick by the breadth of a line, suggested
to her husband that he would do well to look round the shop among the
customers, for any new customer who had dropped in while he stepped
over the way.

The wine-shop keeper accordingly rolled his eyes about, until they
rested upon an elderly gentleman and a young lady, who were seated in
a corner.  Other company were there:  two playing cards, two playing
dominoes, three standing by the counter lengthening out a short
supply of wine.  As he passed behind the counter, he took notice that
the elderly gentleman said in a look to the young lady, "This is our
man."

"What the devil do YOU do in that galley there?" said Monsieur
Defarge to himself; "I don't know you."

But, he feigned not to notice the two strangers, and fell into
discourse with the triumvirate of customers who were drinking at the
counter.

"How goes it, Jacques?" said one of these three to Monsieur Defarge.
"Is all the spilt wine swallowed?"

"Every drop, Jacques," answered Monsieur Defarge.

When this interchange of Christian name was effected, Madame Defarge,
picking her teeth with her toothpick, coughed another grain of cough,
and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line.

"It is not often," said the second of the three, addressing Monsieur
Defarge, "that many of these miserable beasts know the taste of wine,
or of anything but black bread and death.  Is it not so, Jacques?"

"It is so, Jacques," Monsieur Defarge returned.

At this second interchange of the Christian name, Madame Defarge,
still using her toothpick with profound composure, coughed another
grain of cough, and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line.

The last of the three now said his say, as he put down his empty
drinking vessel and smacked his lips.

"Ah!  So much the worse!  A bitter taste it is that such poor cattle
always have in their mouths, and hard lives they live, Jacques.
Am I right, Jacques?"

"You are right, Jacques," was the response of Monsieur Defarge.

This third interchange of the Christian name was completed at the
moment when Madame Defarge put her toothpick by, kept her eyebrows
up, and slightly rustled in her seat.

"Hold then!  True!" muttered her husband.  "Gentlemen--my wife!"

The three customers pulled off their hats to Madame Defarge, with
three flourishes.  She acknowledged their homage by bending her head,
and giving them a quick look.  Then she glanced in a casual manner
round the wine-shop, took up her knitting with great apparent
calmness and repose of spirit, and became absorbed in it.

"Gentlemen," said her husband, who had kept his bright eye
observantly upon her, "good day.  The chamber, furnished bachelor-
fashion, that you wished to see, and were inquiring for when I
stepped out, is on the fifth floor.  The doorway of the staircase
gives on the little courtyard close to the left here," pointing with
his hand, "near to the window of my establishment.  But, now that I
remember, one of you has already been there, and can show the way.
Gentlemen, adieu!"

They paid for their wine, and left the place.  The eyes of Monsieur
Defarge were studying his wife at her knitting when the elderly
gentleman advanced from his corner, and begged the favour of a word.

"Willingly, sir," said Monsieur Defarge, and quietly stepped with him
to the door.

Their conference was very short, but very decided.  Almost at the
first word, Monsieur Defarge started and became deeply attentive.
It had not lasted a minute, when he nodded and went out.  The
gentleman then beckoned to the young lady, and they, too, went out.
Madame Defarge knitted with nimble fingers and steady eyebrows, and
saw nothing.

Mr. Jarvis Lorry and Miss Manette, emerging from the wine-shop thus,
joined Monsieur Defarge in the doorway to which he had directed his
own company just before.  It opened from a stinking little black
courtyard, and was the general public entrance to a great pile of
houses, inhabited by a great number of people.  In the gloomy tile-
paved entry to the gloomy tile-paved staircase, Monsieur Defarge bent
down on one knee to the child of his old master, and put her hand to
his lips.  It was a gentle action, but not at all gently done; a very
remarkable transformation had come over him in a few seconds.  He had
no good-humour in his face, nor any openness of aspect left, but had
become a secret, angry, dangerous man.

"It is very high; it is a little difficult.  Better to begin slowly."
Thus, Monsieur Defarge, in a stem voice, to Mr. Lorry, as they began
ascending the stairs.

"Is he alone?" the latter whispered.

"Alone!  God help him, who should be with him!" said the other, in the
same low voice.

"Is he always alone, then?"

"Yes."

"Of his own desire?"

"Of his own necessity.  As he was, when I first saw him after they
found me and demanded to know if I would take him, and, at my peril
be discreet--as he was then, so he is now."

"He is greatly changed?"

"Changed!"

The keeper of the wine-shop stopped to strike the wall with his hand,
and mutter a tremendous curse.  No direct answer could have been half
so forcible.  Mr. Lorry's spirits grew heavier and heavier, as he and
his two companions ascended higher and higher.

Such a staircase, with its accessories, in the older and more crowded
parts of Paris, would be bad enough now; but, at that time, it was
vile indeed to unaccustomed and unhardened senses.  Every little
habitation within the great foul nest of one high building--that is
to say, the room or rooms within every door that opened on the
general staircase--left its own heap of refuse on its own landing,
besides flinging other refuse from its own windows.  The uncontrollable
and hopeless mass of decomposition so engendered, would have polluted
the air, even if poverty and deprivation had not loaded it with their
intangible impurities; the two bad sources combined made it almost
insupportable.  Through such an atmosphere, by a steep dark shaft of
dirt and poison, the way lay.  Yielding to his own disturbance of
mind, and to his young companion's agitation, which became greater
every instant, Mr. Jarvis Lorry twice stopped to rest.  Each of these
stoppages was made at a doleful grating, by which any languishing
good airs that were left uncorrupted, seemed to escape, and all
spoilt and sickly vapours seemed to crawl in.  Through the rusted
bars, tastes, rather than glimpses, were caught of the jumbled
neighbourhood; and nothing within range, nearer or lower than the
summits of the two great towers of Notre-Dame, had any promise on it
of healthy life or wholesome aspirations.

At last, the top of the staircase was gained, and they stopped for
the third time.  There was yet an upper staircase, of a steeper
inclination and of contracted dimensions, to be ascended, before the
garret story was reached.  The keeper of the wine-shop, always going
a little in advance, and always going on the side which Mr. Lorry
took, as though he dreaded to be asked any question by the young
lady, turned himself about here, and, carefully feeling in the
pockets of the coat he carried over his shoulder, took out a key.

"The door is locked then, my friend?" said Mr. Lorry, surprised.

"Ay.  Yes," was the grim reply of Monsieur Defarge.

"You think it necessary to keep the unfortunate gentleman so retired?"

"I think it necessary to turn the key."  Monsieur Defarge whispered it
closer in his ear, and frowned heavily.

"Why?"

"Why!  Because he has lived so long, locked up, that he would be
frightened-rave-tear himself to pieces-die-come to I know not what
harm--if his door was left open."

"Is it possible!" exclaimed Mr. Lorry.

"Is it possible!" repeated Defarge, bitterly.  "Yes.  And a beautiful
world we live in, when it IS possible, and when many other such
things are possible, and not only possible, but done--done, see
you!--under that sky there, every day.  Long live the Devil.  Let us
go on."

This dialogue had been held in so very low a whisper, that not a word
of it had reached the young lady's ears.  But, by this time she
trembled under such strong emotion, and her face expressed such deep
anxiety, and, above all, such dread and terror, that Mr. Lorry felt
it incumbent on him to speak a word or two of reassurance.

"Courage, dear miss!  Courage!  Business!  The worst will be over
in a moment; it is but passing the room-door, and the worst is over.
Then, all the good you bring to him, all the relief, all the
happiness you bring to him, begin.  Let our good friend here,
assist you on that side.  That's well, friend Defarge.  Come, now.
Business, business!"

They went up slowly and softly.  The staircase was short, and they
were soon at the top.  There, as it had an abrupt turn in it, they
came all at once in sight of three men, whose heads were bent down
close together at the side of a door, and who were intently looking
into the room to which the door belonged, through some chinks or
holes in the wall.  On hearing footsteps close at hand, these three
turned, and rose, and showed themselves to be the three of one name
who had been drinking in the wine-shop.

"I forgot them in the surprise of your visit," explained Monsieur
Defarge.  "Leave us, good boys; we have business here."

The three glided by, and went silently down.

There appearing to be no other door on that floor, and the keeper of
the wine-shop going straight to this one when they were left alone,
Mr. Lorry asked him in a whisper, with a little anger:

"Do you make a show of Monsieur Manette?"

"I show him, in the way you have seen, to a chosen few."

"Is that well?"

"_I_ think it is well."

"Who are the few?  How do you choose them?"

"I choose them as real men, of my name--Jacques is my name--to whom
the sight is likely to do good.  Enough; you are English; that is
another thing.  Stay there, if you please, a little moment."

With an admonitory gesture to keep them back, he stooped, and looked
in through the crevice in the wall.  Soon raising his head again, he
struck twice or thrice upon the door--evidently with no other object
than to make a noise there.  With the same intention, he drew the key
across it, three or four times, before he put it clumsily into the
lock, and turned it as heavily as he could.

The door slowly opened inward under his hand, and he looked into the
room and said something.  A faint voice answered something.  Little
more than a single syllable could have been spoken on either side.

He looked back over his shoulder, and beckoned them to enter.
Mr. Lorry got his arm securely round the daughter's waist, and held
her; for he felt that she was sinking.

"A-a-a-business, business!" he urged, with a moisture that was not of
business shining on his cheek.  "Come in, come in!"

"I am afraid of it," she answered, shuddering.

"Of it?  What?"

"I mean of him.  Of my father."

Rendered in a manner desperate, by her state and by the beckoning of
their conductor, he drew over his neck the arm that shook upon his
shoulder, lifted her a little, and hurried her into the room.  He sat
her down just within the door, and held her, clinging to him.

Defarge drew out the key, closed the door, locked it on the inside,
took out the key again, and held it in his hand.  All this he did,
methodically, and with as loud and harsh an accompaniment of noise as
he could make.  Finally, he walked across the room with a measured
tread to where the window was.  He stopped there, and faced round.

The garret, built to be a depository for firewood and the like, was
dim and dark:  for, the window of dormer shape, was in truth a door in
the roof, with a little crane over it for the hoisting up of stores
from the street:  unglazed, and closing up the middle in two pieces,
like any other door of French construction.  To exclude the cold, one
half of this door was fast closed, and the other was opened but a
very little way.  Such a scanty portion of light was admitted through
these means, that it was difficult, on first coming in, to see
anything; and long habit alone could have slowly formed in any one,
the ability to do any work requiring nicety in such obscurity.  Yet,
work of that kind was being done in the garret; for, with his back
towards the door, and his face towards the window where the keeper of
the wine-shop stood looking at him, a white-haired man sat on a low
bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.



VI

The Shoemaker


"Good day!" said Monsieur Defarge, looking down at the white head
that bent low over the shoemaking.

It was raised for a moment, and a very faint voice responded to the
salutation, as if it were at a distance:

"Good day!"

"You are still hard at work, I see?"

After a long silence, the head was lifted for another moment, and the
voice replied, "Yes--I am working."  This time, a pair of haggard eyes
had looked at the questioner, before the face had dropped again.

The faintness of the voice was pitiable and dreadful.  It was not the
faintness of physical weakness, though confinement and hard fare no
doubt had their part in it.  Its deplorable peculiarity was, that it
was the faintness of solitude and disuse.  It was like the last
feeble echo of a sound made long and long ago.  So entirely had it
lost the life and resonance of the human voice, that it affected the
senses like a once beautiful colour faded away into a poor weak
stain.  So sunken and suppressed it was, that it was like a voice
underground.  So expressive it was, of a hopeless and lost creature,
that a famished traveller, wearied out by lonely wandering in a
wilderness, would have remembered home and friends in such a tone
before lying down to die.

Some minutes of silent work had passed:  and the haggard eyes had
looked up again:  not with any interest or curiosity, but with a dull
mechanical perception, beforehand, that the spot where the only
visitor they were aware of had stood, was not yet empty.

"I want," said Defarge, who had not removed his gaze from the
shoemaker, "to let in a little more light here.  You can bear a
little more?"

The shoemaker stopped his work; looked with a vacant air of listening,
at the floor on one side of him; then similarly, at the floor on the
other side of him; then, upward at the speaker.

"What did you say?"

"You can bear a little more light?"

"I must bear it, if you let it in."  (Laying the palest shadow of a
stress upon the second word.)

The opened half-door was opened a little further, and secured at that
angle for the time.  A broad ray of light fell into the garret, and
showed the workman with an unfinished shoe upon his lap, pausing in
his labour.  His few common tools and various scraps of leather were
at his feet and on his bench.  He had a white beard, raggedly cut,
but not very long, a hollow face, and exceedingly bright eyes.  The
hollowness and thinness of his face would have caused them to look
large, under his yet dark eyebrows and his confused white hair,
though they had been really otherwise; but, they were naturally
large, and looked unnaturally so.  His yellow rags of shirt lay open
at the throat, and showed his body to be withered and worn.  He, and
his old canvas frock, and his loose stockings, and all his poor
tatters of clothes, had, in a long seclusion from direct light and
air, faded down to such a dull uniformity of parchment-yellow, that
it would have been hard to say which was which.

He had put up a hand between his eyes and the light, and the very
bones of it seemed transparent.  So he sat, with a steadfastly vacant
gaze, pausing in his work.  He never looked at the figure before him,
without first looking down on this side of himself, then on that, as
if he had lost the habit of associating place with sound; he never
spoke, without first wandering in this manner, and forgetting to speak.

"Are you going to finish that pair of shoes to-day?" asked Defarge,
motioning to Mr. Lorry to come forward.

"What did you say?"

"Do you mean to finish that pair of shoes to-day?"

"I can't say that I mean to.  I suppose so.  I don't know."

But, the question reminded him of his work, and he bent over it again.

Mr. Lorry came silently forward, leaving the daughter by the door.
When he had stood, for a minute or two, by the side of Defarge, the
shoemaker looked up.  He showed no surprise at seeing another figure,
but the unsteady fingers of one of his hands strayed to his lips as
he looked at it (his lips and his nails were of the same pale lead-
colour), and then the hand dropped to his work, and he once more bent
over the shoe.  The look and the action had occupied but an instant.

"You have a visitor, you see," said Monsieur Defarge.

"What did you say?"

"Here is a visitor."

The shoemaker looked up as before, but without removing a hand from his work.

"Come!" said Defarge.  "Here is monsieur, who knows a well-made shoe
when he sees one.  Show him that shoe you are working at.  Take it, monsieur."

Mr. Lorry took it in his hand.

"Tell monsieur what kind of shoe it is, and the maker's name."

There was a longer pause than usual, before the shoemaker replied:

"I forget what it was you asked me.  What did you say?"

"I said, couldn't you describe the kind of shoe, for monsieur's information?"

"It is a lady's shoe.  It is a young lady's walking-shoe.  It is in the
present mode.  I never saw the mode.  I have had a pattern in my hand."
He glanced at the shoe with some little passing touch of pride.

"And the maker's name?" said Defarge.

Now that he had no work to hold, he laid the knuckles of the right hand
in the hollow of the left, and then the knuckles of the left hand in the
hollow of the right, and then passed a hand across his bearded chin,
and so on in regular changes, without a moment's intermission.
The task of recalling him from the vagrancy into which he always
sank when he had spoken, was like recalling some very weak person
from a swoon, or endeavouring, in the hope of some disclosure,
to stay the spirit of a fast-dying man.

"Did you ask me for my name?"

"Assuredly I did."

"One Hundred and Five, North Tower."

"Is that all?"

"One Hundred and Five, North Tower."

With a weary sound that was not a sigh, nor a groan, he bent to work
again, until the silence was again broken.

"You are not a shoemaker by trade?" said Mr. Lorry, looking steadfastly
at him.

His haggard eyes turned to Defarge as if he would have transferred
the question to him:  but as no help came from that quarter, they
turned back on the questioner when they had sought the ground.

"I am not a shoemaker by trade?  No, I was not a shoemaker by trade.
I-I learnt it here.  I taught myself.  I asked leave to--"

He lapsed away, even for minutes, ringing those measured changes on
his hands the whole time.  His eyes came slowly back, at last, to the
face from which they had wandered; when they rested on it, he started,
and resumed, in the manner of a sleeper that moment awake,
reverting to a subject of last night.

"I asked leave to teach myself, and I got it with much difficulty
after a long while, and I have made shoes ever since."

As he held out his hand for the shoe that had been taken from him,
Mr. Lorry said, still looking steadfastly in his face:

"Monsieur Manette, do you remember nothing of me?"

The shoe dropped to the ground, and he sat looking fixedly at the
questioner.

"Monsieur Manette"; Mr. Lorry laid his hand upon Defarge's arm;
"do you remember nothing of this man?  Look at him.  Look at me.
Is there no old banker, no old business, no old servant, no old time,
rising in your mind, Monsieur Manette?"

As the captive of many years sat looking fixedly, by turns, at
Mr. Lorry and at Defarge, some long obliterated marks of an actively
intent intelligence in the middle of the forehead, gradually forced
themselves through the black mist that had fallen on him.  They were
overclouded again, they were fainter, they were gone; but they had
been there.  And so exactly was the expression repeated on the fair
young face of her who had crept along the wall to a point where she
could see him, and where she now stood looking at him, with hands
which at first had been only raised in frightened compassion, if not
even to keep him off and shut out the sight of him, but which were
now extending towards him, trembling with eagerness to lay the
spectral face upon her warm young breast, and love it back to life
and hope--so exactly was the expression repeated (though in stronger
characters) on her fair young face, that it looked as though it had
passed like a moving light, from him to her.

Darkness had fatten on him in its place.  He looked at the two, less
and less attentively, and his eyes in gloomy abstraction sought the
ground and looked about him in the old way.  Finally, with a deep
long sigh, he took the shoe up, and resumed his work.

"Have you recognised him, monsieur?" asked Defarge in a whisper.

"Yes; for a moment.  At first I thought it quite hopeless, but I have
unquestionably seen, for a single moment, the face that I once knew
so well.  Hush!  Let us draw further back.  Hush!"

She had moved from the wall of the garret, very near to the bench on
which he sat.  There was something awful in his unconsciousness of
the figure that could have put out its hand and touched him as he
stooped over his labour.

Not a word was spoken, not a sound was made.  She stood, like a
spirit, beside him, and he bent over his work.

It happened, at length, that he had occasion to change the instrument
in his hand, for his shoemaker's knife.  It lay on that side of him
which was not the side on which she stood.  He had taken it up, and
was stooping to work again, when his eyes caught the skirt of her
dress.  He raised them, and saw her face.  The two spectators started
forward, but she stayed them with a motion of her hand.  She had no
fear of his striking at her with the knife, though they had.

He stared at her with a fearful look, and after a while his lips
began to form some words, though no sound proceeded from them.  By
degrees, in the pauses of his quick and laboured breathing, he was
heard to say:

"What is this?"

With the tears streaming down her face, she put her two hands to her
lips, and kissed them to him; then clasped them on her breast, as if
she laid his ruined head there.

"You are not the gaoler's daughter?"

She sighed "No."

"Who are you?"

Not yet trusting the tones of her voice, she sat down on the bench
beside him.  He recoiled, but she laid her hand upon his arm.  A
strange thrill struck him when she did so, and visibly passed over
his frame; he laid the knife down' softly, as he sat staring at her.

Her golden hair, which she wore in long curls, had been hurriedly
pushed aside, and fell down over her neck.  Advancing his hand by
little and little, he took it up and looked at it.  In the midst of
the action he went astray, and, with another deep sigh, fell to work
at his shoemaking.

But not for long.  Releasing his arm, she laid her hand upon his
shoulder.  After looking doubtfully at it, two or three times, as if
to be sure that it was really there, he laid down his work, put his
hand to his neck, and took off a blackened string with a scrap of
folded rag attached to it.  He opened this, carefully, on his knee,
and it contained a very little quantity of hair:  not more than one or
two long golden hairs, which he had, in some old day, wound off upon
his finger.

He took her hair into his hand again, and looked closely at it.  "It
is the same.  How can it be!  When was it!  How was it!"

As the concentrated expression returned to his forehead, he seemed to
become conscious that it was in hers too.  He turned her full to the
light, and looked at her.

"She had laid her head upon my shoulder, that night when I was
summoned out--she had a fear of my going, though I had none--and when
I was brought to the North Tower they found these upon my sleeve.
'You will leave me them?  They can never help me to escape in the
body, though they may in the spirit.' Those were the words I said.
I remember them very well."

He formed this speech with his lips many times before he could utter
it. But when he did find spoken words for it, they came to him
coherently, though slowly.

"How was this?--WAS IT YOU?"

Once more, the two spectators started, as he turned upon her with a
frightful suddenness.  But she sat perfectly still in his grasp, and
only said, in a low voice, "I entreat you, good gentlemen, do not
come near us, do not speak, do not move!"

"Hark!" he exclaimed.  "Whose voice was that?"

His hands released her as he uttered this cry, and went up to his
white hair, which they tore in a frenzy.  It died out, as everything
but his shoemaking did die out of him, and he refolded his little
packet and tried to secure it in his breast; but he still looked at
her, and gloomily shook his head.

"No, no, no; you are too young, too blooming.  It can't be.  See what
the prisoner is.  These are not the hands she knew, this is not the
face she knew, this is not a voice she ever heard.  No, no.  She
was--and He was--before the slow years of the North Tower--ages ago.
What is your name, my gentle angel?"

Hailing his softened tone and manner, his daughter fell upon her
knees before him, with her appealing hands upon his breast.

"O, sir, at another time you shall know my name, and who my mother
was, and who my father, and how I never knew their hard, hard
history.  But I cannot tell you at this time, and I cannot tell you
here.  All that I may tell you, here and now, is, that I pray to you
to touch me and to bless me. Kiss me, kiss me!  O my dear, my dear!"

His cold white head mingled with her radiant hair, which warmed and
lighted it as though it were the light of Freedom shining on him.

"If you hear in my voice--I don't know that it is so, but I hope it
is--if you hear in my voice any resemblance to a voice that once was
sweet music in your ears, weep for it, weep for it!  If you touch,
in touching my hair, anything that recalls a beloved head that lay on
your breast when you were young and free, weep for it, weep for it!
If, when I hint to you of a Home that is before us, where I will be
true to you with all my duty and with all my faithful service, I
bring back the remembrance of a Home long desolate, while your poor
heart pined away, weep for it, weep for it!"

She held him closer round the neck, and rocked him on her breast
like a child.

"If, when I tell you, dearest dear, that your agony is over, and that
I have come here to take you from it, and that we go to England to be
at peace and at rest, I cause you to think of your useful life laid
waste, and of our native France so wicked to you, weep for it, weep
for it!  And if, when I shall tell you of my name, and of my father
who is living, and of my mother who is dead, you learn that I have to
kneel to my honoured father, and implore his pardon for having never
for his sake striven all day and lain awake and wept all night,
because the love of my poor mother hid his torture from me, weep for
it, weep for it!  Weep for her, then, and for me!  Good gentlemen,
thank God!  I feel his sacred tears upon my face, and his sobs strike
against my heart. O, see!  Thank God for us, thank God!"

He had sunk in her arms, and his face dropped on her breast:  a sight
so touching, yet so terrible in the tremendous wrong and suffering
which had gone before it, that the two beholders covered their faces.

When the quiet of the garret had been long undisturbed, and his
heaving breast and shaken form had long yielded to the calm that must
follow all storms--emblem to humanity, of the rest and silence into
which the storm called Life must hush at last--they came forward to
raise the father and daughter from the ground.  He had gradually
dropped to the floor, and lay there in a lethargy, worn out.  She had
nestled down with him, that his head might lie upon her arm; and her
hair drooping over him curtained him from the light.

"If, without disturbing him," she said, raising her hand to Mr. Lorry
as he stooped over them, after repeated blowings of his nose, "all
could be arranged for our leaving Paris at once, so that, from the,
very door, he could be taken away--"

"But, consider.  Is he fit for the journey?" asked Mr. Lorry.

"More fit for that, I think, than to remain in this city, so dreadful to him."

"It is true," said Defarge, who was kneeling to look on and hear.
"More than that; Monsieur Manette is, for all reasons, best out of
France.  Say, shall I hire a carriage and post-horses?"

"That's business," said Mr. Lorry, resuming on the shortest notice
his methodical manners; "and if business is to be done, I had better do it."

"Then be so kind," urged Miss Manette, "as to leave us here.  You see
how composed he has become, and you cannot be afraid to leave him
with me now.  Why should you be?  If you will lock the door to secure
us from interruption, I do not doubt that you will find him, when you
come back, as quiet as you leave him.  In any case, I will take care
of him until you return, and then we will remove him straight."

Both Mr. Lorry and Defarge were rather disinclined to this course,
and in favour of one of them remaining.  But, as there were not only
carriage and horses to be seen to, but travelling papers; and as time
pressed, for the day was drawing to an end, it came at last to their
hastily dividing the business that was necessary to be done, and
hurrying away to do it.

Then, as the darkness closed in, the daughter laid her head down on
the hard ground close at the father's side, and watched him.  The
darkness deepened and deepened, and they both lay quiet, until a
light gleamed through the chinks in the wall.

Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all ready for the journey,
and had brought with them, besides travelling cloaks and wrappers,
bread and meat, wine, and hot coffee.  Monsieur Defarge put this
provender, and the lamp he carried, on the shoemaker's bench (there
was nothing else in the garret but a pallet bed), and he and
Mr. Lorry roused the captive, and assisted him to his feet.

No human intelligence could have read the mysteries of his mind, in
the scared blank wonder of his face.  Whether he knew what had
happened, whether he recollected what they had said to him, whether
he knew that he was free, were questions which no sagacity could have
solved.  They tried speaking to him; but, he was so confused, and so
very slow to answer, that they took fright at his bewilderment, and
agreed for the time to tamper with him no more.  He had a wild, lost
manner of occasionally clasping his head in his hands, that had not
been seen in him before; yet, he had some pleasure in the mere sound
of his daughter's voice, and invariably turned to it when she spoke.

In the submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion,
he ate and drank what they gave him to eat and drink, and put on the
cloak and other wrappings, that they gave him to wear.  He readily
responded to his daughter's drawing her arm through his, and
took--and kept--her hand in both his own.

They began to descend; Monsieur Defarge going first with the lamp,
Mr. Lorry closing the little procession.  They had not traversed many
steps of the long main staircase when he stopped, and stared at the
roof and round at the wails.

"You remember the place, my father?  You remember coming up here?"

"What did you say?"

But, before she could repeat the question, he murmured an answer as
if she had repeated it.

"Remember?  No, I don't remember.  It was so very long ago."

That he had no recollection whatever of his having been brought from
his prison to that house, was apparent to them.  They heard him mutter,
"One Hundred and Five, North Tower;" and when he looked about him, it
evidently was for the strong fortress-walls which had long encompassed him.
On their reaching the courtyard he instinctively altered his tread,
as being in expectation of a drawbridge; and when there was no
drawbridge, and he saw the carriage waiting in the open street, he
dropped his daughter's hand and clasped his head again.

No crowd was about the door; no people were discernible at any of the
many windows; not even a chance passerby was in the street.  An unnatural
silence and desertion reigned there.  Only one soul was to be seen,
and that was Madame Defarge--who leaned against the door-post,
knitting, and saw nothing.

The prisoner had got into a coach, and his daughter had followed him,
when Mr. Lorry's feet were arrested on the step by his asking,
miserably, for his shoemaking tools and the unfinished shoes.  Madame
Defarge immediately called to her husband that she would get them,
and went, knitting, out of the lamplight, through the courtyard.  She
quickly brought them down and handed them in;--and immediately
afterwards leaned against the door-post, knitting, and saw nothing.

Defarge got upon the box, and gave the word "To the Barrier!"
The postilion cracked his whip, and they clattered away under
the feeble over-swinging lamps.

Under the over-swinging lamps--swinging ever brighter in the better
streets, and ever dimmer in the worse--and by lighted shops, gay
crowds, illuminated coffee-houses, and theatre-doors, to one of the
city gates.  Soldiers with lanterns, at the guard-house there.
"Your papers, travellers!"  "See here then, Monsieur the Officer,"
said Defarge, getting down, and taking him gravely apart, "these are
the papers of monsieur inside, with the white head.  They were
consigned to me, with him, at the--" He dropped his voice, there was
a flutter among the military lanterns, and one of them being handed
into the coach by an arm in uniform, the eyes connected with the arm
looked, not an every day or an every night look, at monsieur with the
white head.  "It is well.  Forward!" from the uniform.  "Adieu!" from
Defarge.  And so, under a short grove of feebler and feebler
over-swinging lamps, out under the great grove of stars.

Beneath that arch of unmoved and eternal lights; some, so remote from
this little earth that the learned tell us it is doubtful whether
their rays have even yet discovered it, as a point in space where
anything is suffered or done:  the shadows of the night were broad and
black.  All through the cold and restless interval, until dawn, they
once more whispered in the ears of Mr. Jarvis Lorry--sitting opposite
the buried man who had been dug out, and wondering what subtle powers
were for ever lost to him, and what were capable of restoration--the
old inquiry:

"I hope you care to be recalled to life?"

And the old answer:

"I can't say."



The end of the first book.





Book the Second-the Golden Thread




I

Five Years Later


Tellson's Bank by Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place, even in the
year one thousand seven hundred and eighty.  It was very small, very
dark, very ugly, very incommodious.  It was an old-fashioned place,
moreover, in the moral attribute that the partners in the House were
proud of its smallness, proud of its darkness, proud of its ugliness,
proud of its incommodiousness.  They were even boastful of its
eminence in those particulars, and were fired by an express conviction
that, if it were less objectionable, it would be less respectable.
This was no passive belief, but an active weapon which they flashed
at more convenient places of business.  Tellson's (they said) wanted
no elbow-room, Tellson's wanted no light, Tellson's wanted no
embellishment.  Noakes and Co.'s might, or Snooks Brothers' might;
but Tellson's, thank Heaven!--

Any one of these partners would have disinherited his son on the
question of rebuilding Tellson's.  In this respect the House was much
on a par with the Country; which did very often disinherit its sons
for suggesting improvements in laws and customs that had long been
highly objectionable, but were only the more respectable.

Thus it had come to pass, that Tellson's was the triumphant
perfection of inconvenience.  After bursting open a door of idiotic
obstinacy with a weak rattle in its throat, you fell into Tellson's
down two steps, and came to your senses in a miserable little shop,
with two little counters, where the oldest of men made your cheque
shake as if the wind rustled it, while they examined the signature by
the dingiest of windows, which were always under a shower-bath of mud
from Fleet-street, and which were made the dingier by their own iron
bars proper, and the heavy shadow of Temple Bar.  If your business
necessitated your seeing "the House," you were put into a species of
Condemned Hold at the back, where you meditated on a misspent life,
until the House came with its bands in its pockets, and you could
hardly blink at it in the dismal twilight.  Your money came out of,
or went into, wormy old wooden drawers, particles of which flew up
your nose and down your throat when they were opened and shut.  Your
bank-notes had a musty odour, as if they were fast decomposing into
rags again.  Your plate was stowed away among the neighbouring
cesspools, and evil communications corrupted its good polish in a day
or two.  Your deeds got into extemporised strong-rooms made of
kitchens and sculleries, and fretted all the fat out of their
parchments into the banking-house air.  Your lighter boxes of family
papers went up-stairs into a Barmecide room, that always had a great
dining-table in it and never had a dinner, and where, even in the
year one thousand seven hundred and eighty, the first letters written
to you by your old love, or by your little children, were but newly
released from the horror of being ogled through the windows, by the
heads exposed on Temple Bar with an insensate brutality and ferocity
worthy of Abyssinia or Ashantee.

But indeed, at that time, putting to death was a recipe much in vogue
with all trades and professions, and not least of all with Tellson's.
Death is Nature's remedy for all things, and why not Legislation's?
Accordingly, the forger was put to Death; the utterer of a bad note
was put to Death; the unlawful opener of a letter was put to Death;
the purloiner of forty shillings and sixpence was put to Death; the
holder of a horse at Tellson's door, who made off with it, was put to
Death; the coiner of a bad shilling was put to Death; the sounders of
three-fourths of the notes in the whole gamut of Crime, were put to
Death.  Not that it did the least good in the way of prevention--it
might almost have been worth remarking that the fact was exactly the
reverse--but, it cleared off (as to this world) the trouble of each
particular case, and left nothing else connected with it to be looked
after.  Thus, Tellson's, in its day, like greater places of business,
its contemporaries, had taken so many lives, that, if the heads laid
low before it had been ranged on Temple Bar instead of being
privately disposed of, they would probably have excluded what little
light the ground floor bad, in a rather significant manner.

Cramped in all kinds of dun cupboards and hutches at Tellson's, the
oldest of men carried on the business gravely.  When they took a
young man into Tellson's London house, they hid him somewhere till he
was old.  They kept him in a dark place, like a cheese, until he had
the full Tellson flavour and blue-mould upon him.  Then only was he
permitted to be seen, spectacularly poring over large books, and
casting his breeches and gaiters into the general weight of the
establishment.

Outside Tellson's--never by any means in it, unless called in--was an
odd-job-man, an occasional porter and messenger, who served as the
live sign of the house.  He was never absent during business hours,
unless upon an errand, and then he was represented by his son:  a
grisly urchin of twelve, who was his express image.  People
understood that Tellson's, in a stately way, tolerated the
odd-job-man.  The house had always tolerated some person in that
capacity, and time and tide had drifted this person to the post.  His
surname was Cruncher, and on the youthful occasion of his renouncing
by proxy the works of darkness, in the easterly parish church of
Hounsditch, he had received the added appellation of Jerry.

The scene was Mr. Cruncher's private lodging in Hanging-sword-alley,
Whitefriars:  the time, half-past seven of the clock on a windy March
morning, Anno Domini seventeen hundred and eighty. (Mr. Cruncher
himself always spoke of the year of our Lord as Anna Dominoes:
apparently under the impression that the Christian era dated from the
invention of a popular game, by a lady who had bestowed her name upon it.)

Mr. Cruncher's apartments were not in a savoury neighbourhood, and
were but two in number, even if a closet with a single pane of glass
in it might be counted as one.  But they were very decently kept.
Early as it was, on the windy March morning, the room in which he lay
abed was already scrubbed throughout; and between the cups and
saucers arranged for breakfast, and the lumbering deal table, a very
clean white cloth was spread.

Mr. Cruncher reposed under a patchwork counterpane, like a Harlequin
at home.  At fast, he slept heavily, but, by degrees, began to roll
and surge in bed, until he rose above the surface, with his spiky
hair looking as if it must tear the sheets to ribbons.  At which
juncture, he exclaimed, in a voice of dire exasperation:

"Bust me, if she ain't at it agin!"

A woman of orderly and industrious appearance rose from her knees in
a corner, with sufficient haste and trepidation to show that she was
the person referred to.

"What!" said Mr. Cruncher, looking out of bed for a boot.  "You're at
it agin, are you?"

After hailing the mom with this second salutation, he threw a boot at
the woman as a third.  It was a very muddy boot, and may introduce
the odd circumstance connected with Mr. Cruncher's domestic economy,
that, whereas he often came home after banking hours with clean
boots, he often got up next morning to find the same boots
covered with clay.

"What," said Mr. Cruncher, varying his apostrophe after missing
his mark--"what are you up to, Aggerawayter?"

"I was only saying my prayers."

"Saying your prayers!  You're a nice woman!  What do you mean by
flopping yourself down and praying agin me?"

"I was not praying against you; I was praying for you."

"You weren't.  And if you were, I won't be took the liberty with.
Here! your mother's a nice woman, young Jerry, going a praying agin
your father's prosperity.  You've got a dutiful mother, you have, my
son.  You've got a religious mother, you have, my boy:  going and
flopping herself down, and praying that the bread-and-butter may be
snatched out of the mouth of her only child."

Master Cruncher (who was in his shirt) took this very ill, and,
turning to his mother, strongly deprecated any praying away of his
personal board.

"And what do you suppose, you conceited female," said Mr. Cruncher,
with unconscious inconsistency, "that the worth of YOUR prayers may be?
Name the price that you put YOUR prayers at!"

"They only come from the heart, Jerry.  They are worth no more than that."

"Worth no more than that," repeated Mr. Cruncher.
"They ain't worth much, then.  Whether or no,
I won't be prayed agin, I tell you.  I can't afford it.
I'm not a going to be made unlucky by YOUR sneaking.
If you must go flopping yourself down, flop in favour
of your husband and child, and not in opposition to 'em. If I
had had any but a unnat'ral wife, and this poor boy had had any but
a unnat'ral mother, I might have made some money last week instead
of being counter-prayed and countermined and religiously circumwented
into the worst of luck.  B-u-u-ust me!" said Mr. Cruncher, who all
this time had been putting on his clothes, "if I ain't, what with
piety and one blowed thing and another, been choused this last week
into as bad luck as ever a poor devil of a honest tradesman met with!
Young Jerry, dress yourself, my boy, and while I clean my boots keep
a eye upon your mother now and then, and if you see any signs of more
flopping, give me a call.  For, I tell you," here he addressed his
wife once more, "I won't be gone agin, in this manner.  I am as
rickety as a hackney-coach, I'm as sleepy as laudanum, my lines is
strained to that degree that I shouldn't know, if it wasn't for the
pain in 'em, which was me and which somebody else, yet I'm none the
better for it in pocket; and it's my suspicion that you've been at it
from morning to night to prevent me from being the better for it in pocket,
and I won't put up with it, Aggerawayter, and what do you say now!"

Growling, in addition, such phrases as "Ah! yes!  You're religious, too.
You wouldn't put yourself in opposition to the interests of your husband
and child, would you?  Not you!" and throwing off other sarcastic sparks
from the whirling grindstone of his indignation, Mr. Cruncher betook
himself to his boot-cleaning and his general preparation for business.
In the meantime, his son, whose head was garnished with tenderer spikes,
and whose young eyes stood close by one another, as his father's did,
kept the required watch upon his mother.  He greatly disturbed that
poor woman at intervals, by darting out of his sleeping closet,
where he made his toilet, with a suppressed cry of "You are going to flop,
mother.  --Halloa, father!" and, after raising this fictitious alarm,
darting in again with an undutiful grin.

Mr. Cruncher's temper was not at all improved when he came to his
breakfast.  He resented Mrs. Cruncher's saying grace with particular
animosity.

"Now, Aggerawayter!  What are you up to?  At it again?"

His wife explained that she had merely "asked a blessing."

"Don't do it!" said Mr. Crunches looking about, as if he rather
expected to see the loaf disappear under the efficacy of his wife's
petitions.  "I ain't a going to be blest out of house and home.
I won't have my wittles blest off my table.  Keep still!"

Exceedingly red-eyed and grim, as if he had been up all night at a
party which had taken anything but a convivial turn, Jerry Cruncher
worried his breakfast rather than ate it, growling over it like any
four-footed inmate of a menagerie.  Towards nine o'clock he smoothed
his ruffled aspect, and, presenting as respectable and business-like
an exterior as he could overlay his natural self with, issued forth
to the occupation of the day.

It could scarcely be called a trade, in spite of his favourite
description of himself as "a honest tradesman."  His stock consisted
of a wooden stool, made out of a broken-backed chair cut down, which
stool, young Jerry, walking at his father's side, carried every
morning to beneath the banking-house window that was nearest Temple
Bar:  where, with the addition of the first handful of straw that
could be gleaned from any passing vehicle to keep the cold and wet
from the odd-job-man's feet, it formed the encampment for the day.
On this post of his, Mr. Cruncher was as well known to Fleet-street
and the Temple, as the Bar itself,--and was almost as in-looking.

Encamped at a quarter before nine, in good time to touch his three-
cornered hat to the oldest of men as they passed in to Tellson's,
Jerry took up his station on this windy March morning, with young
Jerry standing by him, when not engaged in making forays through the
Bar, to inflict bodily and mental injuries of an acute description on
passing boys who were small enough for his amiable purpose.  Father
and son, extremely like each other, looking silently on at the
morning traffic in Fleet-street, with their two heads as near to one
another as the two eyes of each were, bore a considerable resemblance
to a pair of monkeys.  The resemblance was not lessened by the
accidental circumstance, that the mature Jerry bit and spat out
straw, while the twinkling eyes of the youthful Jerry were as
restlessly watchful of him as of everything else in Fleet-street.

The head of one of the regular indoor messengers attached to
Tellson's establishment was put through the door, and the word was
given:

"Porter wanted!"

"Hooray, father!  Here's an early job to begin with!"

Having thus given his parent God speed, young Jerry seated himself on
the stool, entered on his reversionary interest in the straw his
father had been chewing, and cogitated.

"Al-ways rusty!  His fingers is al-ways rusty!" muttered young Jerry.
"Where does my father get all that iron rust from?  He don't get no
iron rust here!"



II

A Sight


"You know the Old Bailey, well, no doubt?" said one of the oldest of
clerks to Jerry the messenger.

"Ye-es, sir," returned Jerry, in something of a dogged manner.  "I
DO know the Bailey."

"Just so.  And you know Mr. Lorry."

"I know Mr. Lorry, sir, much better than I know the Bailey.  Much
better," said Jerry, not unlike a reluctant witness at the
establishment in question, "than I, as a honest tradesman, wish to
know the Bailey."

"Very well.  Find the door where the witnesses go in, and show the
door-keeper this note for Mr. Lorry.  He will then let you in."

"Into the court, sir?"

"Into the court."

Mr. Cruncher's eyes seemed to get a little closer to one another, and
to interchange the inquiry, "What do you think of this?"

"Am I to wait in the court, sir?" he asked, as the result of that
conference.

"I am going to tell you.  The door-keeper will pass the note to Mr.
Lorry, and do you make any gesture that will attract Mr. Lorry's
attention, and show him where you stand.  Then what you have to do,
is, to remain there until he wants you."

"Is that all, sir?"

"That's all.  He wishes to have a messenger at hand.  This is to tell
him you are there."

As the ancient clerk deliberately folded and superscribed the note,
Mr. Cruncher, after surveying him in silence until he came to the
blotting-paper stage, remarked:

"I suppose they'll be trying Forgeries this morning?"

"Treason!"

"That's quartering," said Jerry.  "Barbarous!"

"It is the law," remarked the ancient clerk, turning his surprised
spectacles upon him.  "It is the law."

"It's hard in the law to spile a man, I think.  Ifs hard enough to
kill him, but it's wery hard to spile him, sir."

"Not at all," retained the ancient clerk.  "Speak well of the law.
Take care of your chest and voice, my good friend, and leave the law
to take care of itself.  I give you that advice."

"It's the damp, sir, what settles on my chest and voice," said Jerry.
"I leave you to judge what a damp way of earning a living mine is."

"WeB, well," said the old clerk; "we aa have our various ways of
gaining a livelihood.  Some of us have damp ways, and some of us have
dry ways.  Here is the letter.  Go along."

Jerry took the letter, and, remarking to himself with less internal
deference than he made an outward show of, "You are a lean old one,
too," made his bow, informed his son, in passing, of his destination,
and went his way.

They hanged at Tyburn, in those days, so the street outside Newgate
had not obtained one infamous notoriety that has since attached to
it.  But, the gaol was a vile place, in which most kinds of
debauchery and villainy were practised, and where dire diseases were
bred, that came into court with the prisoners, and sometimes rushed
straight from the dock at my Lord Chief Justice himself, and pulled
him off the bench.  It had more than once happened, that the Judge in
the black cap pronounced his own doom as certainly as the prisoner's,
and even died before him.  For the rest, the Old Bailey was famous as
a kind of deadly inn-yard, from which pale travellers set out
continually, in carts and coaches, on a violent passage into the
other world:  traversing some two miles and a half of public street
and road, and shaming few good citizens, if any.  So powerful is use,
and so desirable to be good use in the beginning.  It was famous,
too, for the pillory, a wise old institution, that inflicted a
punishment of which no one could foresee the extent; also, for the
whipping-post, another dear old institution, very humanising and
softening to behold in action; also, for extensive transactions in
blood-money, another fragment of ancestral wisdom, systematically
leading to the most frightful mercenary crimes that could be
committed under Heaven.  Altogether, the Old Bailey, at that date,
was a choice illustration of the precept, that "Whatever is is right;"
an aphorism that would be as final as it is lazy, did it not include
the troublesome consequence, that nothing that ever was, was wrong.

Making his way through the tainted crowd, dispersed up and down this
hideous scene of action, with the skill of a man accustomed to make
his way quietly, the messenger found out the door he sought, and
handed in his letter through a trap in it.  For, people then paid to
see the play at the Old Bailey, just as they paid to see the play in
Bedlam--only the former entertainment was much the dearer. Therefore,
all the Old Bailey doors were well guarded--except, indeed, the
social doors by which the criminals got there, and those were always
left wide open.

After some delay and demur, the door grudgingly turned on its hinges
a very little way, and allowed Mr. Jerry Cruncher to squeeze himself
into court.

"What's on?" he asked, in a whisper, of the man he found himself next to.

"Nothing yet."

"What's coming on?"

"The Treason case."

"The quartering one, eh?"

"Ah!" returned the man, with a relish; "he'll be drawn on a hurdle
to be half hanged, and then he'll be taken down and sliced before
his own face, and then his inside will be taken out and burnt while
he looks on, and then his head will be chopped off, and he'll be
cut into quarters.  That's the sentence."

"If he's found Guilty, you mean to say?" Jerry added, by way of proviso.

"Oh! they'll find him guilty," said the other.  "Don't you be afraid of that."

Mr. Cruncher's attention was here diverted to the door-keeper, whom
he saw making his way to Mr. Lorry, with the note in his hand.  Mr.
Lorry sat at a table, among the gentlemen in wigs:  not far from a
wigged gentleman, the prisoner's counsel, who had a great bundle of
papers before him:  and nearly opposite another wigged gentleman with
his hands in his pockets, whose whole attention, when Mr. Cruncher
looked at him then or afterwards, seemed to be concentrated on the
ceiling of the court.  After some gruff coughing and rubbing of his
chin and signing with his hand, Jerry attracted the notice of
Mr. Lorry, who had stood up to look for him, and who quietly nodded
and sat down again.

"What's HE got to do with the case?" asked the man he had spoken with.

"Blest if I know," said Jerry.

"What have YOU got to do with it, then, if a person may inquire?"

"Blest if I know that either," said Jerry.

The entrance of the Judge, and a consequent great stir and settling
down in the court, stopped the dialogue.  Presently, the dock became
the central point of interest.  Two gaolers, who had been standing
there, wont out, and the prisoner was brought in, and put to the bar.

Everybody present, except the one wigged gentleman who looked at the
ceiling, stared at him.  All the human breath in the place, rolled at
him, like a sea, or a wind, or a fire.  Eager faces strained round
pillars and corners, to get a sight of him; spectators in back rows
stood up, not to miss a hair of him; people on the floor of the
court, laid their hands on the shoulders of the people before them,
to help themselves, at anybody's cost, to a view of him--stood
a-tiptoe, got upon ledges, stood upon next to nothing, to see every
inch of him.  Conspicuous among these latter, like an animated bit of
the spiked wall of Newgate, Jerry stood:  aiming at the prisoner the
beery breath of a whet he had taken as he came along, and discharging
it to mingle with the waves of other beer, and gin, and tea, and
coffee, and what not, that flowed at him, and already broke upon the
great windows behind him in an impure mist and rain.

The object of all this staring and blaring, was a young man of about
five-and-twenty, well-grown and well-looking, with a sunburnt cheek
and a dark eye.  His condition was that of a young gentleman.  He was
plainly dressed in black, or very dark grey, and his hair, which was
long and dark, was gathered in a ribbon at the back of his neck; more
to be out of his way than for ornament.  As an emotion of the mind
will express itself through any covering of the body, so the paleness
which his situation engendered came through the brown upon his cheek,
showing the soul to be stronger than the sun.  He was otherwise quite
self-possessed, bowed to the Judge, and stood quiet.

The sort of interest with which this man was stared and breathed at,
was not a sort that elevated humanity.  Had he stood in peril of a
less horrible sentence--had there been a chance of any one of its
savage details being spared--by just so much would he have lost in
his fascination.  The form that was to be doomed to be so shamefully
mangled, was the sight; the immortal creature that was to be so
butchered and torn asunder, yielded the sensation.  Whatever gloss
the various spectators put upon the interest, according to their
several arts and powers of self-deceit, the interest was, at the
root of it, Ogreish.

Silence in the court!  Charles Darnay had yesterday pleaded Not Guilty
to an indictment denouncing him (with infinite jingle and jangle) for
that he was a false traitor to our serene, illustrious, excellent,
and so forth, prince, our Lord the King, by reason of his having, on
divers occasions, and by divers means and ways, assisted Lewis, the
French King, in his wars against our said serene, illustrious,
excellent, and so forth; that was to say, by coming and going,
between the dominions of our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and
so forth, and those of the said French Lewis, and wickedly, falsely,
traitorously, and otherwise evil-adverbiously, revealing to the said
French Lewis what forces our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and
so forth, had in preparation to send to Canada and North America.
This much, Jerry, with his head becoming more and more spiky as the
law terms bristled it, made out with huge satisfaction, and so
arrived circuitously at the understanding that the aforesaid, and
over and over again aforesaid, Charles Darnay, stood there before him
upon his trial; that the jury were swearing in; and that
Mr. Attorney-General was making ready to speak.

The accused, who was (and who knew he was) being mentally hanged,
beheaded, and quartered, by everybody there, neither flinched from
the situation, nor assumed any theatrical air in it.  He was quiet
and attentive; watched the opening proceedings with a grave interest;
and stood with his hands resting on the slab of wood before him, so
composedly, that they had not displaced a leaf of the herbs with
which it was strewn.  The court was all bestrewn with herbs and
sprinkled with vinegar, as a precaution against gaol air and gaol
fever.

Over the prisoner's head there was a mirror, to throw the light down
upon him.  Crowds of the wicked and the wretched had been reflected
in it, and had passed from its surface and this earth's together.
Haunted in a most ghastly manner that abominable place would have
been, if the glass could ever have rendered back its reflections, as
the ocean is one day to give up its dead.  Some passing thought of
the infamy and disgrace for which it had been reserved, may have
struck the prisoner's mind.  Be that as it may, a change in his
position making him conscious of a bar of light across his face, he
looked up; and when he saw the glass his face flushed, and his right
hand pushed the herbs away.

It happened, that the action turned his face to that side of the
court which was on his left.  About on a level with his eyes, there
sat, in that corner of the Judge's bench, two persons upon whom his look
immediately rested; so immediately, and so much to the changing of his aspect,
that all the eyes that were tamed upon him, turned to them.

The spectators saw in the two figures, a young lady of little more
than twenty, and a gentleman who was evidently her father; a man of
a very remarkable appearance in respect of the absolute whiteness
of his hair, and a certain indescribable intensity of face:  not of
an active kind, but pondering and self-communing.  When this expression
was upon him, he looked as if he were old; but when it was stirred
and broken up--as it was now, in a moment, on his speaking to his
daughter--he became a handsome man, not past the prime of life.

His daughter had one of her hands drawn through his arm, as she sat
by him, and the other pressed upon it.  She had drawn close to him,
in her dread of the scene, and in her pity for the prisoner.  Her
forehead had been strikingly expressive of an engrossing terror and
compassion that saw nothing but the peril of the accused.  This had
been so very noticeable, so very powerfully and naturally shown, that
starers who had had no pity for him were touched by her; and the
whisper went about, "Who are they?"

Jerry, the messenger, who had made his own observations, in his own
manner, and who had been sucking the rust off his fingers in his
absorption, stretched his neck to hear who they were.  The crowd
about him had pressed and passed the inquiry on to the nearest
attendant, and from him it had been more slowly pressed and passed
back; at last it got to Jerry:

"Witnesses."

"For which side?"

"Against."

"Against what side?"

"The prisoner's."

The Judge, whose eyes had gone in the general direction, recalled
them, leaned back in his seat, and looked steadily at the man whose
life was in his hand, as Mr. Attorney-General rose to spin the rope,
grind the axe, and hammer the nails into the scaffold.



III

A Disappointment


Mr. Attorney-General had to inform the jury, that the prisoner before
them, though young in years, was old in the treasonable practices
which claimed the forfeit of his life.  That this correspondence with
the public enemy was not a correspondence of to-day, or of yesterday,
or even of last year, or of the year before.  That, it was certain
the prisoner had, for longer than that, been in the habit of passing
and repassing between France and England, on secret business of which
he could give no honest account.  That, if it were in the nature of
traitorous ways to thrive (which happily it never was), the real
wickedness and guilt of his business might have remained undiscovered.
That Providence, however, had put it into the heart of a person who
was beyond fear and beyond reproach, to ferret out the nature of the
prisoner's schemes, and, struck with horror, to disclose them to his
Majesty's Chief Secretary of State and most honourable Privy Council.
That, this patriot would be produced before them.  That, his position
and attitude were, on the whole, sublime.  That, he had been the
prisoner's friend, but, at once in an auspicious and an evil hour
detecting his infamy, had resolved to immolate the traitor he could
no longer cherish in his bosom, on the sacred altar of his country.
That, if statues were decreed in Britain, as in ancient Greece and
Rome, to public benefactors, this shining citizen would assuredly
have had one.  That, as they were not so decreed, he probably would
not have one.  That, Virtue, as had been observed by the poets (in
many passages which he well knew the jury would have, word for word,
at the tips of their tongues; whereat the jury's countenances
displayed a guilty consciousness that they knew nothing about the
passages), was in a manner contagious; more especially the bright
virtue known as patriotism, or love of country.  That, the lofty
example of this immaculate and unimpeachable witness for the Crown,
to refer to whom however unworthily was an honour, had communicated
itself to the prisoner's servant, and had engendered in him a holy
determination to examine his master's table-drawers and pockets, and
secrete his papers.  That, he (Mr. Attorney-General) was prepared to
hear some disparagement attempted of this admirable servant; but that,
in a general way, he preferred him to his (Mr. Attorney-General's)
brothers and sisters, and honoured him more than his
(Mr. Attorney-General's) father and mother.  That, he called with
confidence on the jury to come and do likewise.  That, the evidence
of these two witnesses, coupled with the documents of their
discovering that would be produced, would show the prisoner to have
been furnished with lists of his Majesty's forces, and of their
disposition and preparation, both by sea and land, and would leave no
doubt that he had habitually conveyed such information to a hostile
power.  That, these lists could not be proved to be in the prisoner's
handwriting; but that it was all the same; that, indeed, it was
rather the better for the prosecution, as showing the prisoner to be
artful in his precautions.  That, the proof would go back five years,
and would show the prisoner already engaged in these pernicious
missions, within a few weeks before the date of the very first action
fought between the British troops and the Americans.  That, for these
reasons, the jury, being a loyal jury (as he knew they were), and
being a responsible jury (as THEY knew they were), must positively
find the prisoner Guilty, and make an end of him, whether they liked
it or not.  That, they never could lay their heads upon their pillows;
that, they never could tolerate the idea of their wives laying their
heads upon their pillows; that, they never could endure the notion of
their children laying their heads upon their pillows; in short, that
there never more could be, for them or theirs, any laying of heads
upon pillows at all, unless the prisoner's head was taken off.  That
head Mr. Attorney-General concluded by demanding of them, in the name
of everything he could think of with a round turn in it, and on the
faith of his solemn asseveration that he already considered the
prisoner as good as dead and gone.

When the Attorney-General ceased, a buzz arose in the court as if
a cloud of great blue-flies were swarming about the prisoner, in
anticipation of what he was soon to become.  When toned down again,
the unimpeachable patriot appeared in the witness-box.

Mr. Solicitor-General then, following his leader's lead, examined
the patriot:  John Barsad, gentleman, by name.  The story of his pure
soul was exactly what Mr. Attorney-General had described it to be--
perhaps, if it had a fault, a little too exactly.  Having released
his noble bosom of its burden, he would have modestly withdrawn
himself, but that the wigged gentleman with the papers before him,
sitting not far from Mr. Lorry, begged to ask him a few questions.
The wigged gentleman sitting opposite, still looking at the ceiling
of the court.

Had he ever been a spy himself?  No, he scorned the base insinuation.
What did he live upon?  His property.  Where was his property?
He didn't precisely remember where it was.  What was it?  No business
of anybody's.  Had he inherited it?  Yes, he had.  From whom?  Distant
relation.  Very distant?  Rather.  Ever been in prison?  Certainly not.
Never in a debtors' prison?  Didn't see what that had to do with it.
Never in a debtors' prison?--Come, once again.  Never?  Yes.  How many
times?  Two or three times.  Not five or six?  Perhaps.  Of what profession?
Gentleman.  Ever been kicked?  Might have been. Frequently?  No.
Ever kicked downstairs?  Decidedly not; once received a kick on the
top of a staircase, and fell downstairs of his own accord.  Kicked on
that occasion for cheating at dice?  Something to that effect was said
by the intoxicated liar who committed the assault, but it was not
true.  Swear it was not true?  Positively. Ever live by cheating at
play?  Never.  Ever live by play?  Not more than other gentlemen do.
Ever borrow money of the prisoner?  Yes.  Ever pay him?  No. Was not
this intimacy with the prisoner, in reality a very slight one, forced
upon the prisoner in coaches, inns, and packets?  No.  Sure he saw
the prisoner with these lists?  Certain.  Knew no more about the
lists?  No. Had not procured them himself, for instance?  No. Expect
to get anything by this evidence?  No. Not in regular government pay
and employment, to lay traps?  Oh dear no.  Or to do anything?  Oh dear no.
Swear that?  Over and over again.  No motives but motives of sheer patriotism?
None whatever.

The virtuous servant, Roger Cly, swore his way through the case at a
great rate.  He had taken service with the prisoner, in good faith
and simplicity, four years ago.  He had asked the prisoner, aboard
the Calais packet, if he wanted a handy fellow, and the prisoner had
engaged him.  He had not asked the prisoner to take the handy fellow
as an act of charity--never thought of such a thing.  He began to
have suspicions of the prisoner, and to keep an eye upon him, soon
afterwards.  In arranging his clothes, while travelling, he had seen
similar lists to these in the prisoner's pockets, over and over again.
He had taken these lists from the drawer of the prisoner's desk.
He had not put them there first.  He had seen the prisoner show these
identical lists to French gentlemen at Calais, and similar lists to
French gentlemen, both at Calais and Boulogne.  He loved his country,
and couldn't bear it, and had given information.  He had never been
suspected of stealing a silver tea-pot; he had been maligned respecting
a mustard-pot, but it turned out to be only a plated one.  He had
known the last witness seven or eight years; that was merely a
coincidence.  He didn't call it a particularly curious coincidence;
most coincidences were curious.  Neither did he call it a curious
coincidence that true patriotism was HIS only motive too.  He was a
true Briton, and hoped there were many like him.

The blue-flies buzzed again, and Mr. Attorney-General called Mr. Jarvis Lorry.

"Mr. Jarvis Lorry, are you a clerk in Tellson's bank?"

"I am."

"On a certain Friday night in November one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five, did business occasion you to travel between London and
Dover by the mail?"

"It did."

"Were there any other passengers in the mail?"

"Two."

"Did they alight on the road in the course of the night?"

"They did."

"Mr. Lorry, look upon the prisoner.  Was he one of those two passengers?"

"I cannot undertake to say that he was."

"Does he resemble either of these two passengers?"

"Both were so wrapped up, and the night was so dark, and we were all
so reserved, that I cannot undertake to say even that."

"Mr. Lorry, look again upon the prisoner.  Supposing him wrapped up
as those two passengers were, is there anything in his bulk and
stature to render it unlikely that he was one of them?"

"No."

"You will not swear, Mr. Lorry, that he was not one of them?"

"No."

"So at least you say he may have been one of them?"

"Yes.  Except that I remember them both to have been--like myself--
timorous of highwaymen, and the prisoner has not a timorous air."

"Did you ever see a counterfeit of timidity, Mr. Lorry?"

"I certainly have seen that."

"Mr. Lorry, look once more upon the prisoner.  Have you seen him,
to your certain knowledge, before?"

"I have."

"When?"

"I was returning from France a few days afterwards, and, at Calais,
the prisoner came on board the packet-ship in which I returned, and
made the voyage with me."

"At what hour did he come on board?"

"At a little after midnight."

"In the dead of the night.  Was he the only passenger who came on
board at that untimely hour?"

"He happened to be the only one."

"Never mind about `happening,' Mr. Lorry.  He was the only passenger
who came on board in the dead of the night?"

"He was."

"Were you travelling alone, Mr. Lorry, or with any companion?"

"With two companions.  A gentleman and lady.  They are here."

"They are here.  Had you any conversation with the prisoner?"

"Hardly any.  The weather was stormy, and the passage long and rough,
and I lay on a sofa, almost from shore to shore."

"Miss Manette!"

The young lady, to whom all eyes had been turned before, and were now
turned again, stood up where she had sat.  Her father rose with her,
and kept her hand drawn through his arm.

"Miss Manette, look upon the prisoner."

To be confronted with such pity, and such earnest youth and beauty,
was far more trying to the accused than to be confronted with all the
crowd.  Standing, as it were, apart with her on the edge of his grave,
not all the staring curiosity that looked on, could, for the moment,
nerve him to remain quite still.  His hurried right hand parcelled
out the herbs before him into imaginary beds of flowers in a garden;
and his efforts to control and steady his breathing shook the lips
from which the colour rushed to his heart.  The buzz of the great
flies was loud again.

"Miss Manette, have you seen the prisoner before?"

"Yes, sir."

"Where?"

"On board of the packet-ship just now referred to, sir, and on the
same occasion."

"You are the young lady just now referred to?"

"O! most unhappily, I am!"

The plaintive tone of her compassion merged into the less musical
voice of the Judge, as he said something fiercely:
"Answer the questions put to you, and make no remark upon them."

"Miss Manette, had you any conversation with the prisoner on that
passage across the Channel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Recall it."

In the midst of a profound stillness, she faintly began:  "When the
gentleman came on board--"

"Do you mean the prisoner?" inquired the Judge, knitting his brows.

"Yes, my Lord."

"Then say the prisoner."

"When the prisoner came on board, he noticed that my father," turning
her eyes lovingly to him as he stood beside her, "was much fatigued
and in a very weak state of health.  My father was so reduced that I
was afraid to take him out of the air, and I had made a bed for him
on the deck near the cabin steps, and I sat on the deck at his side
to take care of him.  There were no other passengers that night, but
we four.  The prisoner was so good as to beg permission to advise me
how I could shelter my father from the wind and weather, better than
I had done.  I had not known how to do it well, not understanding how
the wind would set when we were out of the harbour.  He did it for me.
He expressed great gentleness and kindness for my father's state, and
I am sure he felt it.  That was the manner of our beginning to speak
together."

"Let me interrupt you for a moment.  Had he come on board alone?"

"No."

"How many were with him?"

"Two French gentlemen."

"Had they conferred together?"

"They had conferred together until the last moment, when it was
necessary for the French gentlemen to be landed in their boat."

"Had any papers been handed about among them, similar to these lists?"

"Some papers had been handed about among them, but I don't know what
papers."

"Like these in shape and size?"

"Possibly, but indeed I don't know, although they stood whispering
very near to me:  because they stood at the top of the cabin steps to
have the light of the lamp that was hanging there; it was a dull lamp,
and they spoke very low, and I did not hear what they said, and saw
only that they looked at papers."

"Now, to the prisoner's conversation, Miss Manette."

"The prisoner was as open in his confidence with me--which arose out
of my helpless situation--as he was kind, and good, and useful to my
father.  I hope," bursting into tears, "I may not repay him by doing
him harm to-day."

Buzzing from the blue-flies.

"Miss Manette, if the prisoner does not perfectly understand that you
give the evidence which it is your duty to give--which you must give--
and which you cannot escape from giving--with great unwillingness,
he is the only person present in that condition.  Please to go on."

"He told me that he was travelling on business of a delicate and
difficult nature, which might get people into trouble, and that he
was therefore travelling under an assumed name.  He said that this
business had, within a few days, taken him to France, and might,
at intervals, take him backwards and forwards between France and
England for a long time to come."

"Did he say anything about America, Miss Manette?  Be particular."

"He tried to explain to me how that quarrel had arisen, and he said that,
so far as he could judge, it was a wrong and foolish one on England's
part.  He added, in a jesting way, that perhaps George Washington
might gain almost as great a name in history as George the Third.
But there was no harm in his way of saying this:  it was said laughingly,
and to beguile the time."

Any strongly marked expression of face on the part of a chief actor
in a scene of great interest to whom many eyes are directed, will be
unconsciously imitated by the spectators.  Her forehead was painfully
anxious and intent as she gave this evidence, and, in the pauses when
she stopped for the Judge to write it down, watched its effect upon
the counsel for and against.  Among the lookers-on there was the same
expression in all quarters of the court; insomuch, that a great
majority of the foreheads there, might have been mirrors reflecting
the witness, when the Judge looked up from his notes to glare at that
tremendous heresy about George Washington.

Mr. Attorney-General now signified to my Lord, that he deemed it
necessary, as a matter of precaution and form, to call the young
lady's father, Doctor Manette.  Who was called accordingly.

"Doctor Manette, look upon the prisoner.  Have you ever seen him before?"

"Once.  When he caged at my lodgings in London.  Some three years, or
three years and a half ago."

"Can you identify him as your fellow-passenger on board the packet,
or speak to his conversation with your daughter?"

"Sir, I can do neither."

"Is there any particular and special reason for your being unable to
do either?"

He answered, in a low voice, "There is."

"Has it been your misfortune to undergo a long imprisonment, without
trial, or even accusation, in your native country, Doctor Manette?"

He answered, in a tone that went to every heart, "A long imprisonment."

"Were you newly released on the occasion in question?"

"They tell me so."

"Have you no remembrance of the occasion?"

"None.  My mind is a blank, from some time--I cannot even say what time--
when I employed myself, in my captivity, in making shoes,
to the time when I found myself living in London with my dear
daughter here.  She had become familiar to me, when a gracious God
restored my faculties; but, I am quite unable even to say how she
had become familiar.  I have no remembrance of the process."

Mr. Attorney-General sat down, and the father and daughter sat down together.

A singular circumstance then arose in the case.  The object in hand
being to show that the prisoner went down, with some fellow-plotter
untracked, in the Dover mail on that Friday night in November five
years ago, and got out of the mail in the night, as a blind, at a
place where he did not remain, but from which he travelled back some
dozen miles or more, to a garrison and dockyard, and there collected
information; a witness was called to identify him as having been at
the precise time required, in the coffee-room of an hotel in that
garrison-and-dockyard town, waiting for another person.  The prisoner's
counsel was cross-examining this witness with no result, except that
he had never seen the prisoner on any other occasion, when the wigged
gentleman who had all this time been looking at the ceiling of the
court, wrote a word or two on a little piece of paper, screwed it up,
and tossed it to him.  Opening this piece of paper in the next pause,
the counsel looked with great attention and curiosity at the prisoner.

"You say again you are quite sure that it was the prisoner?"

The witness was quite sure.

"Did you ever see anybody very like the prisoner?"

Not so like (the witness said) as that he could be mistaken.

"Look well upon that gentleman, my learned friend there," pointing to
him who had tossed the paper over, "and then look well upon the prisoner.
How say you?  Are they very like each other?"

Allowing for my learned friend's appearance being careless and
slovenly if not debauched, they were sufficiently like each other to
surprise, not only the witness, but everybody present, when they were
thus brought into comparison.  My Lord being prayed to bid my learned
friend lay aside his wig, and giving no very gracious consent, the
likeness became much more remarkable.  My Lord inquired of Mr. Stryver
(the prisoner's counsel), whether they were next to try Mr. Carton
(name of my learned friend) for treason?  But, Mr. Stryver replied to
my Lord, no; but he would ask the witness to tell him whether what
happened once, might happen twice; whether he would have been so
confident if he had seen this illustration of his rashness sooner,
whether he would be so confident, having seen it; and more.
The upshot of which, was, to smash this witness like a crockery vessel,
and shiver his part of the case to useless lumber.

Mr. Cruncher had by this time taken quite a lunch of rust off his
fingers in his following of the evidence.  He had now to attend while
Mr. Stryver fitted the prisoner's case on the jury, like a compact
suit of clothes; showing them how the patriot, Barsad, was a hired spy
and traitor, an unblushing trafficker in blood, and one of the greatest
scoundrels upon earth since accursed Judas--which he certainly did
look rather like.  How the virtuous servant, Cly, was his friend and
partner, and was worthy to be; how the watchful eyes of those forgers
and false swearers had rested on the prisoner as a victim, because
some family affairs in France, he being of French extraction, did
require his making those passages across the Channel--though what
those affairs were, a consideration for others who were near and dear
to him, forbade him, even for his life, to disclose.  How the evidence
that had been warped and wrested from the young lady, whose anguish in
giving it they had witnessed, came to nothing, involving the mere
little innocent gallantries and politenesses likely to pass between
any young gentleman and young lady so thrown together;--with the
exception of that reference to George Washington, which was altogether
too extravagant and impossible to be regarded in any other light than
as a monstrous joke.  How it would be a weakness in the government to
break down in this attempt to practise for popularity on the lowest
national antipathies and fears, and therefore Mr. Attorney-General had
made the most of it; how, nevertheless, it rested upon nothing, save
that vile and infamous character of evidence too often disfiguring
such cases, and of which the State Trials of this country were full.
But, there my Lord interposed (with as grave a face as if it had not
been true), saying that he could not sit upon that Bench and suffer
those allusions.

Mr. Stryver then called his few witnesses, and Mr. Cruncher had next
to attend while Mr. Attorney-General turned the whole suit of clothes
Mr. Stryver had fitted on the jury, inside out; showing how Barsad and
Cly were even a hundred times better than he had thought them, and the
prisoner a hundred times worse.  Lastly, came my Lord himself, turning
the suit of clothes, now inside out, now outside in, but on the whole
decidedly trimming and shaping them into grave-clothes for the
prisoner.

And now, the jury turned to consider, and the great flies swarmed again.

Mr. Carton, who had so long sat looking at the ceiling of the court,
changed neither his place nor his attitude, even in this excitement.
While his teamed friend, Mr. Stryver, massing his papers before him,
whispered with those who sat near, and from time to time glanced
anxiously at the jury; while all the spectators moved more or less,
and grouped themselves anew; while even my Lord himself arose from his
seat, and slowly paced up and down his platform, not unattended by a
suspicion in the minds of the audience that his state was feverish;
this one man sat leaning back, with his torn gown half off him, his
untidy wig put on just as it had happened to fight on his head after
its removal, his hands in his pockets, and his eyes on the ceiling as
they had been all day.  Something especially reckless in his demeanour,
not only gave him a disreputable look, but so diminished the strong
resemblance he undoubtedly bore to the prisoner (which his momentary
earnestness, when they were compared together, had strengthened),
that many of the lookers-on, taking note of him now, said to one
another they would hardly have thought the two were so alike.
Mr. Cruncher made the observation to his next neighbour, and added,
"I'd hold half a guinea that HE don't get no law-work to do.
Don't look like the sort of one to get any, do he?"

Yet, this Mr. Carton took in more of the details of the scene than he
appeared to take in; for now, when Miss Manette's head dropped upon
her father's breast, he was the first to see it, and to say audibly:
"Officer! look to that young lady.  Help the gentleman to take her out.
Don't you see she will fall!"

There was much commiseration for her as she was removed, and much
sympathy with her father.  It had evidently been a great distress to
him, to have the days of his imprisonment recalled.  He had shown
strong internal agitation when he was questioned, and that pondering
or brooding look which made him old, had been upon him, like a heavy
cloud, ever since.  As he passed out, the jury, who had turned back
and paused a moment, spoke, through their foreman.

They were not agreed, and wished to retire.  My Lord (perhaps with
George Washington on his mind) showed some surprise that they were not
agreed, but signified his pleasure that they should retire under watch
and ward, and retired himself.  The trial had lasted all day, and the
lamps in the court were now being lighted.  It began to be rumoured
that the jury would be out a long while.  The spectators dropped off
to get refreshment, and the prisoner withdrew to the back of the dock,
and sat down.

Mr. Lorry, who had gone out when the young lady and her father went out,
now reappeared, and beckoned to Jerry:  who, in the slackened interest,
could easily get near him.

"Jerry, if you wish to take something to eat, you can.  But, keep in
the way.  You will be sure to hear when the jury come in.  Don't be a
moment behind them, for I want you to take the verdict back to the bank.
You are the quickest messenger I know, and will get to Temple Bar long
before I can."

Jerry had just enough forehead to knuckle, and he knuckled it in
acknowedgment of this communication and a shilling.  Mr. Carton came
up at the moment, and touched Mr. Lorry on the arm.

"How is the young lady?"

"She is greatly distressed; but her father is comforting her, and she
feels the better for being out of court."

"I'll tell the prisoner so.  It won't do for a respectable bank
gentleman like you, to be seen speaking to him publicly, you know."

Mr. Lorry reddened as if he were conscious of having debated the point
in his mind, and Mr. Carton made his way to the outside of the bar.
The way out of court lay in that direction, and Jerry followed him,
all eyes, ears, and spikes.

"Mr. Darnay!"

The prisoner came forward directly.

"You will naturally be anxious to hear of the witness, Miss Manette.
She will do very well.  You have seen the worst of her agitation."

"I am deeply sorry to have been the cause of it.  Could you tell her
so for me, with my fervent acknowledgments?"

"Yes, I could.  I will, if you ask it."

Mr. Carton's manner was so careless as to be almost insolent.  He stood,
half turned from the prisoner, lounging with his elbow against the bar.

"I do ask it.  Accept my cordial thanks."

"What," said Carton, still only half turned towards him, "do you
expect, Mr. Darnay?"

"The worst."

"It's the wisest thing to expect, and the likeliest.  But I think
their withdrawing is in your favour."

Loitering on the way out of court not being allowed, Jerry heard no
more:  but left them--so like each other in feature, so unlike each
other in manner--standing side by side, both reflected in the glass
above them.

An hour and a half limped heavily away in the thief-and-rascal crowded
passages below, even though assisted off with mutton pies and ale.
The hoarse messenger, uncomfortably seated on a form after taking that
refection, had dropped into a doze, when a loud murmur and a rapid
tide of people setting up the stairs that led to the court, carried
him along with them.

"Jerry!  Jerry!"  Mr. Lorry was already calling at the door when
he got there.

"Here, sir!  It's a fight to get back again.  Here I am, sir!"

Mr. Lorry handed him a paper through the throng.
"Quick!  Have you got it?"

"Yes, sir."

Hastily written on the paper was the word "AQUITTED."

"If you had sent the message, `Recalled to Life,' again," muttered
Jerry, as he turned, "I should have known what you meant, this time."

He had no opportunity of saying, or so much as thinking, anything
else, until he was clear of the Old Bailey; for, the crowd came
pouring out with a vehemence that nearly took him off his legs, and a
loud buzz swept into the street as if the baffled blue-flies were
dispersing in search of other carrion.



IV

Congratulatory


From the dimly-lighted passages of the court, the last sediment of the
human stew that had been boiling there all day, was straining off,
when Doctor Manette, Lucie Manette, his daughter, Mr. Lorry, the
solicitor for the defence, and its counsel, Mr. Stryver, stood
gathered round Mr. Charles Darnay--just released--congratulating him
on his escape from death.

It would have been difficult by a far brighter light, to recognise in
Doctor Manette, intellectual of face and upright of bearing, the
shoemaker of the garret in Paris.  Yet, no one could have looked at
him twice, without looking again:  even though the opportunity of
observation had not extended to the mournful cadence of his low grave
voice, and to the abstraction that overclouded him fitfully, without
any apparent reason.  While one external cause, and that a reference
to his long lingering agony, would always--as on the trial--evoke this
condition from the depths of his soul, it was also in its nature to
arise of itself, and to draw a gloom over him, as incomprehensible to
those unacquainted with his story as if they had seen the shadow of
the actual Bastille thrown upon him by a summer sun, when the
substance was three hundred miles away.

Only his daughter had the power of charming this black brooding from
his mind.  She was the golden thread that united him to a Past beyond
his misery, and to a Present beyond his misery:  and the sound of her
voice, the light of her face, the touch of her hand, had a strong
beneficial influence with him almost always.  Not absolutely always,
for she could recall some occasions on which her power had failed;
but they were few and slight, and she believed them over.

Mr. Darnay had kissed her hand fervently and gratefully, and had
turned to Mr. Stryver, whom he warmly thanked.  Mr. Stryver, a man of
little more than thirty, but looking twenty years older than he was,
stout, loud, red, bluff, and free from any drawback of delicacy,
had a pushing way of shouldering himself (morally and physically)
into companies and conversations, that argued well for his shouldering
his way up in life.

He still had his wig and gown on, and he said, squaring himself at his
late client to that degree that he squeezed the innocent Mr. Lorry
clean out of the group:  "I am glad to have brought you off with honour,
Mr. Darnay.  It was an infamous prosecution, grossly infamous;
but not the less likely to succeed on that account."

"You have laid me under an obligation to you for life--in two senses,"
said his late client, taking his hand.

"I have done my best for you, Mr. Darnay; and my best is as good as
another man's, I believe."

It clearly being incumbent on some one to say, "Much better," Mr. Lorry
said it; perhaps not quite disinterestedly, but with the interested
object of squeezing himself back again.

"You think so?" said Mr. Stryver.  "Well! you have been present all day,
and you ought to know.  You are a man of business, too."

"And as such," quoth Mr. Lorry, whom the counsel learned in the law
had now shouldered back into the group, just as he had previously
shouldered him out of it--"as such I will appeal to Doctor Manette,
to break up this conference and order us all to our homes.
Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr. Darnay has had a terrible day, we are worn out."

"Speak for yourself, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver; "I have a night's work
to do yet.  Speak for yourself."

"I speak for myself," answered Mr. Lorry, "and for Mr. Darnay, and for
Miss Lucie, and--Miss Lucie, do you not think I may speak for us all?"
He asked her the question pointedly, and with a glance at her father.

His face had become frozen, as it were, in a very curious look at
Darnay:  an intent look, deepening into a frown of dislike and distrust,
not even unmixed with fear.  With this strange expression on him his
thoughts had wandered away.

"My father," said Lucie, softly laying her hand on his.

He slowly shook the shadow off, and turned to her.

"Shall we go home, my father?"

With a long breath, he answered "Yes."

The friends of the acquitted prisoner had dispersed, under the
impression--which he himself had originated--that he would not be
released that night.  The lights were nearly all extinguished in the
passages, the iron gates were being closed with a jar and a rattle,
and the dismal place was deserted until to-morrow morning's interest
of gallows, pillory, whipping-post, and branding-iron, should repeople
it.  Walking between her father and Mr. Darnay, Lucie Manette passed
into the open air.  A hackney-coach was called, and the father and
daughter departed in it.

Mr. Stryver had left them in the passages, to shoulder his way back
to the robing-room.  Another person, who had not joined the group,
or interchanged a word with any one of them, but who had been leaning
against the wall where its shadow was darkest, had silently strolled
out after the rest, and had looked on until the coach drove away.
He now stepped up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnay stood upon the
pavement.

"So, Mr. Lorry!  Men of business may speak to Mr. Darnay now?"

Nobody had made any acknowledgment of Mr. Carton's part in the day's
proceedings; nobody had known of it.  He was unrobed, and was none
the better for it in appearance.

"If you knew what a conflict goes on in the business mind, when the
business mind is divided between good-natured impulse and business
appearances, you would be amused, Mr. Darnay."

Mr. Lorry reddened, and said, warmly, "You have mentioned that before,
sir.  We men of business, who serve a House, are not our own masters.
We have to think of the House more than ourselves."

"_I_ know, _I_ know," rejoined Mr. Carton, carelessly.  "Don't be
nettled, Mr. Lorry.  You are as good as another, I have no doubt:
better, I dare say."

"And indeed, sir," pursued Mr. Lorry, not minding him, "I really
don't know what you have to do with the matter.  If you'll excuse me,
as very much your elder, for saying so, I really don't know that it is
your business."

"Business!  Bless you, _I_ have no business," said Mr. Carton.

"It is a pity you have not, sir."

"I think so, too."

"If you had," pursued Mr. Lorry, "perhaps you would attend to it."

"Lord love you, no!--I shouldn't," said Mr. Carton.

"Well, sir!" cried Mr. Lorry, thoroughly heated by his indifference,
"business is a very good thing, and a very respectable thing.  And, sir,
if business imposes its restraints and its silences and impediments,
Mr. Darnay as a young gentleman of generosity knows how to make allowance
for that circumstance.  Mr. Darnay, good night, God bless you, sir!
I hope you have been this day preserved for a prosperous and happy
life.--Chair there!"

Perhaps a little angry with himself, as well as with the barrister,
Mr. Lorry bustled into the chair, and was carried off to Tellson's.
Carton, who smelt of port wine, and did not appear to be quite sober,
laughed then, and turned to Darnay:

"This is a strange chance that throws you and me together.  This must
be a strange night to you, standing alone here with your counterpart
on these street stones?"

"I hardly seem yet," returned Charles Darnay, "to belong to this world
again."

"I don't wonder at it; it's not so long since you were pretty far
advanced on your way to another.  You speak faintly."

"I begin to think I AM faint."

"Then why the devil don't you dine?  I dined, myself, while those
numskulls were deliberating which world you should belong to--this,
or some other.  Let me show you the nearest tavern to dine well at."

Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate-hill to
Fleet-street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern.  Here, they
were shown into a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon recruiting
his strength with a good plain dinner and good wine:  while Carton sat
opposite to him at the same table, with his separate bottle of port
before him, and his fully half-insolent manner upon him.

"Do you feel, yet, that you belong to this terrestrial scheme again,
Mr. Darnay?"

"I am frightfully confused regarding time and place; but I am so far
mended as to feel that."

"It must be an immense satisfaction!"

He said it bitterly, and filled up his glass again:  which was a large one.

"As to me, the greatest desire I have, is to forget that I belong to
it.  It has no good in it for me--except wine like this--nor I for it.
So we are not much alike in that particular.  Indeed, I begin to think
we are not much alike in any particular, you and I."

Confused by the emotion of the day, and feeling his being there with
this Double of coarse deportment, to be like a dream, Charles Darnay
was at a loss how to answer; finally, answered not at all.

"Now your dinner is done," Carton presently said, "why don't you call
a health, Mr. Darnay; why don't you give your toast?"

"What health?  What toast?"

"Why, it's on the tip of your tongue.  It ought to be, it must be,
I'll swear it's there."

"Miss Manette, then!"

"Miss Manette, then!"

Looking his companion full in the face while he drank the toast,
Carton flung his glass over his shoulder against the wall, where it
shivered to pieces; then, rang the bell, and ordered in another.

"That's a fair young lady to hand to a coach in the dark, Mr. Darnay!"
he said, ruing his new goblet.

A slight frown and a laconic "Yes," were the answer.

"That's a fair young lady to be pitied by and wept for by!  How does it
feel?  Is it worth being tried for one's life, to be the object of such
sympathy and compassion, Mr. Darnay?"

Again Darnay answered not a word.

"She was mightily pleased to have your message, when I gave it her.
Not that she showed she was pleased, but I suppose she was."

The allusion served as a timely reminder to Darnay that this
disagreeable companion had, of his own free will, assisted him in the
strait of the day.  He turned the dialogue to that point, and thanked
him for it.

"I neither want any thanks, nor merit any," was the careless rejoinder.
"It was nothing to do, in the first place; and I don't know why I did it,
in the second.  Mr. Darnay, let me ask you a question."

"Willingly, and a small return for your good offices."

"Do you think I particularly like you?"

"Really, Mr. Carton," returned the other, oddly disconcerted, "I have
not asked myself the question."

"But ask yourself the question now."

"You have acted as if you do; but I don't think you do."

"_I_ don't think I do," said Carton.  "I begin to have a very good
opinion of your understanding."

"Nevertheless," pursued Darnay, rising to ring the bell, "there is
nothing in that, I hope, to prevent my calling the reckoning, and our
parting without ill-blood on either side."

Carton rejoining, "Nothing in life!" Darnay rang.  "Do you call the
whole reckoning?" said Carton.  On his answering in the affirmative,
"Then bring me another pint of this same wine, drawer, and come and
wake me at ten."

The bill being paid, Charles Darnay rose and wished him good night.
Without returning the wish, Carton rose too, with something of a
threat of defiance in his manner, and said, "A last word, Mr. Darnay:
you think I am drunk?"

"I think you have been drinking, Mr. Carton."

"Think?  You know I have been drinking."

"Since I must say so, I know it."

"Then you shall likewise know why.  I am a disappointed drudge, sir.
I care for no man on earth, and no man on earth cares for me."

"Much to be regretted.  You might have used your talents better."

"May be so, Mr. Darnay; may be not.  Don't let your sober face elate you,
however; you don't know what it may come to.  Good night!"

When he was left alone, this strange being took up a candle, went to a
glass that hung against the wall, and surveyed himself minutely in it.

"Do you particularly like the man?" he muttered, at his own image;
"why should you particularly like a man who resembles you?  There is
nothing in you to like; you know that.  Ah, confound you!  What a
change you have made in yourself!  A good reason for taking to a man,
that he shows you what you have fallen away from, and what you might
have been!  Change places with him, and would you have been looked at
by those blue eyes as he was, and commiserated by that agitated face
as he was?  Come on, and have it out in plain words!  You hate the fellow."

He resorted to his pint of wine for consolation, drank it all in a
few minutes, and fell asleep on his arms, with his hair straggling
over the table, and a long winding-sheet in the candle dripping down
upon him.



V

The Jackal


Those were drinking days, and most men drank hard.  So very great is
the improvement Time has brought about in such habits, that a moderate
statement of the quantity of wine and punch which one man would swallow
in the course of a night, without any detriment to his reputation as a
perfect gentleman, would seem, in these days, a ridiculous exaggeration.
The learned profession of the law was certainly not behind any other
learned profession in its Bacchanalian propensities; neither was
Mr. Stryver, already fast shouldering his way to a large and lucrative
practice, behind his compeers in this particular, any more than in the
drier parts of the legal race.

A favourite at the Old Bailey, and eke at the Sessions, Mr. Stryver
had begun cautiously to hew away the lower staves of the ladder on
which he mounted.  Sessions and Old Bailey had now to summon their
favourite, specially, to their longing arms; and shouldering itself
towards the visage of the Lord Chief Justice in the Court of King's
Bench, the florid countenance of Mr. Stryver might be daily seen,
bursting out of the bed of wigs, like a great sunflower pushing its
way at the sun from among a rank garden-full of flaring companions.

It had once been noted at the Bar, that while Mr. Stryver was a glib
man, and an unscrupulous, and a ready, and a bold, he had not that
faculty of extracting the essence from a heap of statements, which is
among the most striking and necessary of the advocate's accomplishments.
But, a remarkable improvement came upon him as to this.  The more
business he got, the greater his power seemed to grow of getting at
its pith and marrow; and however late at night he sat carousing with
Sydney Carton, he always had his points at his fingers' ends in the morning.

Sydney Carton, idlest and most unpromising of men, was Stryver's great
ally.  What the two drank together, between Hilary Term and Michaelmas,
might have floated a king's ship.  Stryver never had a case in hand,
anywhere, but Carton was there, with his hands in his pockets, staring
at the ceiling of the court; they went the same Circuit, and even there
they prolonged their usual orgies late into the night, and Carton was
rumoured to be seen at broad day, going home stealthily and unsteadily
to his lodgings, like a dissipated cat.  At last, it began to get about,
among such as were interested in the matter, that although Sydney Carton
would never be a lion, he was an amazingly good jackal, and that he
rendered suit and service to Stryver in that humble capacity.

"Ten o'clock, sir," said the man at the tavern, whom he had charged to
wake him--"ten o'clock, sir."

"WHAT'S the matter?"

"Ten o'clock, sir."

"What do you mean?  Ten o'clock at night?"

"Yes, sir.  Your honour told me to call you."

"Oh!  I remember.  Very well, very well."

After a few dull efforts to get to sleep again, which the man dexterously
combated by stirring the fire continuously for five minutes, he got up,
tossed his hat on, and walked out.  He turned into the Temple, and,
having revived himself by twice pacing the pavements of King's Bench-walk
and Paper-buildings, turned into the Stryver chambers.

The Stryver clerk, who never assisted at these conferences, had gone home,
and the Stryver principal opened the door.  He had his slippers on,
and a loose bed-gown, and his throat was bare for his greater ease.
He had that rather wild, strained, seared marking about the eyes,
which may be observed in all free livers of his class, from the portrait
of Jeffries downward, and which can be traced, under various disguises
of Art, through the portraits of every Drinking Age.

"You are a little late, Memory," said Stryver.

"About the usual time; it may be a quarter of an hour later."

They went into a dingy room lined with books and littered with papers,
where there was a blazing fire.  A kettle steamed upon the hob, and in
the midst of the wreck of papers a table shone, with plenty of wine
upon it, and brandy, and rum, and sugar, and lemons.

"You have had your bottle, I perceive, Sydney."

"Two to-night, I think.  I have been dining with the day's client;
or seeing him dine--it's all one!"

"That was a rare point, Sydney, that you brought to bear upon the
identification.  How did you come by it?  When did it strike you?"

"I thought he was rather a handsome fellow, and I thought I should
have been much the same sort of fellow, if I had had any luck."

Mr. Stryver laughed till he shook his precocious paunch.

"You and your luck, Sydney!  Get to work, get to work."

Sullenly enough, the jackal loosened his dress, went into an adjoining
room, and came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin, and a towel
or two.  Steeping the towels in the water, and partially wringing them
out, he folded them on his head in a manner hideous to behold, sat down
at the table, and said, "Now I am ready!"

"Not much boiling down to be done to-night, Memory," said Mr. Stryver,
gaily, as he looked among his papers.

"How much?"

"Only two sets of them."

"Give me the worst first."

"There they are, Sydney.  Fire away!"

The lion then composed himself on his back on a sofa on one side of
the drinking-table, while the jackal sat at his own paper-bestrewn
table proper, on the other side of it, with the bottles and glasses
ready to his hand.  Both resorted to the drinking-table without
stint, but each in a different way; the lion for the most part
reclining with his hands in his waistband, looking at the fire, or
occasionally flirting with some lighter document; the jackal, with
knitted brows and intent face, so deep in his task, that his eyes did
not even follow the hand he stretched out for his glass--which often
groped about, for a minute or more, before it found the glass for his
lips.  Two or three times, the matter in hand became so knotty, that
the jackal found it imperative on him to get up, and steep his towels
anew.  From these pilgrimages to the jug and basin, he returned with
such eccentricities of damp headgear as no words can describe; which
were made the more ludicrous by his anxious gravity.

At length the jackal had got together a compact repast for the lion,
and proceeded to offer it to him.  The lion took it with care and
caution, made his selections from it, and his remarks upon it,
and the jackal assisted both.  When the repast was fully discussed,
the lion put his hands in his waistband again, and lay down to mediate.
The jackal then invigorated himself with a bum for his throttle,
and a fresh application to his head, and applied himself to the
collection of a second meal; this was administered to the lion in the
same manner, and was not disposed of until the clocks struck three in
the morning.

"And now we have done, Sydney, fill a bumper of punch," said Mr. Stryver.

The jackal removed the towels from his head, which had been steaming
again, shook himself, yawned, shivered, and complied.

"You were very sound, Sydney, in the matter of those crown witnesses
to-day.  Every question told."

"I always am sound; am I not?"

"I don't gainsay it.  What has roughened your temper?
Put some punch to it and smooth it again."

With a deprecatory grunt, the jackal again complied.

"The old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School," said Stryver,
nodding his head over him as he reviewed him in the present and the
past, "the old seesaw Sydney.  Up one minute and down the next; now
in spirits and now in despondency!"

"Ah!" returned the other, sighing:  "yes!  The same Sydney, with the
same luck.  Even then, I did exercises for other boys, and seldom did
my own.

"And why not?"

"God knows.  It was my way, I suppose."

He sat, with his hands in his pockets and his legs stretched out
before him, looking at the fire.

"Carton," said his friend, squaring himself at him with a bullying
air, as if the fire-grate had been the furnace in which sustained
endeavour was forged, and the one delicate thing to be done for the
old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School was to shoulder him into it,
"your way is, and always was, a lame way.  You summon no energy and
purpose.  Look at me."

"Oh, botheration!" returned Sydney, with a lighter and more good-
humoured laugh, "don't YOU be moral!"

"How have I done what I have done?" said Stryver; "how do I do what I do?"

"Partly through paying me to help you, I suppose.  But it's not worth
your while to apostrophise me, or the air, about it; what you want to
do, you do.  You were always in the front rank, and I was always behind."

"I had to get into the front rank; I was not born there, was I?"

"I was not present at the ceremony; but my opinion is you were," said
Carton.  At this, he laughed again, and they both laughed.

"Before Shrewsbury, and at Shrewsbury, and ever since Shrewsbury,"
pursued Carton, "you have fallen into your rank, and I have fallen
into mine.  Even when we were fellow-students in the Student-Quarter
of Paris, picking up French, and French law, and other French crumbs
that we didn't get much good of, you were always somewhere, and I was
always nowhere."

"And whose fault was that?"

"Upon my soul, I am not sure that it was not yours.  You were always
driving and riving and shouldering and passing, to that restless
degree that I had no chance for my life but in rust and repose.  It's
a gloomy thing, however, to talk about one's own past, with the day
breaking.  Turn me in some other direction before I go."

"Well then!  Pledge me to the pretty witness," said Stryver, holding
up his glass.  "Are you turned in a pleasant direction?"

Apparently not, for he became gloomy again.

"Pretty witness," he muttered, looking down into his glass.  "I have
had enough of witnesses to-day and to-night; who's your pretty
witness?"

"The picturesque doctor's daughter, Miss Manette."

"SHE pretty?"

"Is she not?"

"No."

"Why, man alive, she was the admiration of the whole Court!"

"Rot the admiration of the whole Court!  Who made the Old Bailey a
judge of beauty?  She was a golden-haired doll!"

"Do you know, Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, looking at him with sharp
eyes, and slowly drawing a hand across his florid face:  "do you know,
I rather thought, at the time, that you sympathised with the
golden-haired doll, and were quick to see what happened to the
golden-haired doll?"

"Quick to see what happened!  If a girl, doll or no doll, swoons
within a yard or two of a man's nose, he can see it without a
perspective-glass.  I pledge you, but I deny the beauty.
And now I'll have no more drink; I'll get to bed."

When his host followed him out on the staircase with a candle,
to light him down the stairs, the day was coldly looking in through
its grimy windows.  When he got out of the house, the air was cold
and sad, the dull sky overcast, the river dark and dim, the whole
scene like a lifeless desert.  And wreaths of dust were spinning
round and round before the morning blast, as if the desert-sand had
risen far away, and the first spray of it in its advance had begun to
overwhelm the city.

Waste forces within him, and a desert all around, this man stood
still on his way across a silent terrace, and saw for a moment,
lying in the wilderness before him, a mirage of honourable ambition,
self-denial, and perseverance.  In the fair city of this vision,
there were airy galleries from which the loves and graces looked upon
him, gardens in which the fruits of life hung ripening, waters of Hope
that sparkled in his sight.  A moment, and it was gone.  Climbing to
a high chamber in a well of houses, he threw himself down in his
clothes on a neglected bed, and its pillow was wet with wasted tears.

Sadly, sadly, the sun rose; it rose upon no sadder sight than the man
of good abilities and good emotions, incapable of their directed
exercise, incapable of his own help and his own happiness, sensible
of the blight on him, and resigning himself to let it eat him away.



VI

Hundreds of People


The quiet lodgings of Doctor Manette were in a quiet street-corner
not far from Soho-square.  On the afternoon of a certain fine Sunday
when the waves of four months had roiled over the trial for treason,
and carried it, as to the public interest and memory, far out to sea,
Mr. Jarvis Lorry walked along the sunny streets from Clerkenwell
where he lived, on his way to dine with the Doctor.  After several
relapses into business-absorption, Mr. Lorry had become the Doctor's
friend, and the quiet street-corner was the sunny part of his life.

On this certain fine Sunday, Mr. Lorry walked towards Soho, early in
the afternoon, for three reasons of habit.  Firstly, because, on fine
Sundays, he often walked out, before dinner, with the Doctor and Lucie;
secondly, because, on unfavourable Sundays, he was accustomed to be
with them as the family friend, talking, reading, looking out of window,
and generally getting through the day; thirdly, because he happened
to have his own little shrewd doubts to solve, and knew how the ways
of the Doctor's household pointed to that time as a likely time for
solving them.

A quainter corner than the corner where the Doctor lived, was not to
be found in London.  There was no way through it, and the front windows
of the Doctor's lodgings commanded a pleasant little vista of street
that had a congenial air of retirement on it.  There were few buildings
then, north of the Oxford-road, and forest-trees flourished, and wild
flowers grew, and the hawthorn blossomed, in the now vanished fields.
As a consequence, country airs circulated in Soho with vigorous freedom,
instead of languishing into the parish like stray paupers without a
settlement; and there was many a good south wall, not far off, on which
the peaches ripened in their season.

The summer light struck into the corner brilliantly in the earlier
part of the day; but, when the streets grew hot, the corner was in
shadow, though not in shadow so remote but that you could see beyond
it into a glare of brightness.  It was a cool spot, staid but cheerful,
a wonderful place for echoes, and a very harbour from the raging streets.

There ought to have been a tranquil bark in such an anchorage, and
there was.  The Doctor occupied two floors of a large stiff house,
where several callings purported to be pursued by day, but whereof
little was audible any day, and which was shunned by all of them at
night.  In a building at the back, attainable by a courtyard where a
plane-tree rustled its green leaves, church-organs claimed to be
made, and silver to be chased, and likewise gold to be beaten by some
mysterious giant who had a golden arm starting out of the wall of the
front hall--as if he had beaten himself precious, and menaced a similar
conversion of all visitors.  Very little of these trades, or of a
lonely lodger rumoured to live up-stairs, or of a dim coach-trimming
maker asserted to have a counting-house below, was ever heard or seen.
Occasionally, a stray workman putting his coat on, traversed the
hall, or a stranger peered about there, or a distant clink was heard
across the courtyard, or a thump from the golden giant.  These,
however, were only the exceptions required to prove the rule that the
sparrows in the plane-tree behind the house, and the echoes in the
corner before it, had their own way from Sunday morning unto Saturday
night.

Doctor Manette received such patients here as his old reputation,
and its revival in the floating whispers of his story, brought him.
His scientific knowledge, and his vigilance and skill in conducting
ingenious experiments, brought him otherwise into moderate request,
and he earned as much as he wanted.

These things were within Mr. Jarvis Lorry's knowledge, thoughts, and
notice, when he rang the door-bell of the tranquil house in the corner,
on the fine Sunday afternoon.

"Doctor Manette at home?"

Expected home.

"Miss Lucie at home?"

Expected home.

"Miss Pross at home?"

Possibly at home, but of a certainty impossible for handmaid to anticipate
intentions of Miss Pross, as to admission or denial of the fact.

"As I am at home myself," said Mr. Lorry, "I'll go upstairs."

Although the Doctor's daughter had known nothing of the country of
her birth, she appeared to have innately derived from it that ability
to make much of little means, which is one of its most useful and
most agreeable characteristics.  Simple as the furniture was, it was
set off by so many little adornments, of no value but for their taste
and fancy, that its effect was delightful.  The disposition of
everything in the rooms, from the largest object to the least; the
arrangement of colours, the elegant variety and contrast obtained by
thrift in trifles, by delicate hands, clear eyes, and good sense;
were at once so pleasant in themselves, and so expressive of their
originator, that, as Mr. Lorry stood looking about him, the very
chairs and tables seemed to ask him, with something of that peculiar
expression which he knew so well by this time, whether he approved?

There were three rooms on a floor, and, the doors by which they
communicated being put open that the air might pass freely through
them all, Mr. Lorry, smilingly observant of that fanciful resemblance
which he detected all around him, walked from one to another.
The first was the best room, and in it were Lucie's birds, and flowers,
and books, and desk, and work-table, and box of water-colours;
the second was the Doctor's consulting-room, used also as the
dining-room; the third, changingly speckled by the rustle of the
plane-tree in the yard, was the Doctor's bedroom, and there, in a
corner, stood the disused shoemaker's bench and tray of tools,
much as it had stood on the fifth floor of the dismal house by the
wine-shop, in the suburb of Saint Antoine in Paris.

"I wonder," said Mr. Lorry, pausing in his looking about, "that he
keeps that reminder of his sufferings about him!"

"And why wonder at that?" was the abrupt inquiry that made him start.

It proceeded from Miss Pross, the wild red woman, strong of hand,
whose acquaintance he had first made at the Royal George Hotel at Dover,
and had since improved.

"I should have thought--" Mr. Lorry began.

"Pooh!  You'd have thought!" said Miss Pross; and Mr. Lorry left off.

"How do you do?" inquired that lady then--sharply, and yet as if to
express that she bore him no malice.

"I am pretty well, I thank you," answered Mr. Lorry, with meekness;
"how are you?"

"Nothing to boast of," said Miss Pross.

"Indeed?"

"Ah! indeed!" said Miss Pross.  "I am very much put out about my Ladybird."

"Indeed?"

"For gracious sake say something else besides `indeed,' or you'll
fidget me to death," said Miss Pross:  whose character (dissociated
from stature) was shortness.

"Really, then?" said Mr. Lorry, as an amendment.

"Really, is bad enough," returned Miss Pross, "but better.  Yes, I am
very much put out."

"May I ask the cause?"

"I don't want dozens of people who are not at all worthy of Ladybird,
to come here looking after her," said Miss Pross.

"DO dozens come for that purpose?"

"Hundreds," said Miss Pross.

It was characteristic of this lady (as of some other people before her
time and since) that whenever her original proposition was questioned,
she exaggerated it.

"Dear me!" said Mr. Lorry, as the safest remark he could think of.

"I have lived with the darling--or the darling has lived with me,
and paid me for it; which she certainly should never have done,
you may take your affidavit, if I could have afforded to keep either
myself or her for nothing--since she was ten years old.  And it's
really very hard," said Miss Pross.

Not seeing with precision what was very hard, Mr. Lorry shook his head;
using that important part of himself as a sort of fairy cloak that
would fit anything.

"All sorts of people who are not in the least degree worthy of the pet,
are always turning up," said Miss Pross.  "When you began it--"

"_I_ began it, Miss Pross?"

"Didn't you?  Who brought her father to life?"

"Oh!  If THAT was beginning it--" said Mr. Lorry.

"It wasn't ending it, I suppose?  I say, when you began it, it was hard
enough; not that I have any fault to find with Doctor Manette, except
that he is not worthy of such a daughter, which is no imputation on
him, for it was not to be expected that anybody should be, under any
circumstances.  But it ready is doubly and trebly hard to have crowds
and multitudes of people turning up after him (I could have forgiven him),
to take Ladybird's affections away from me."

Mr. Lorry knew Miss Pross to be very jealous, but he also knew her by
this time to be, beneath the service of her eccentricity, one of those
unselfish creatures--found only among women--who will, for pure love
and admiration, bind themselves willing slaves, to youth when they
have lost it, to beauty that they never had, to accomplishments that
they were never fortunate enough to gain, to bright hopes that never
shone upon their own sombre lives.  He knew enough of the world to
know that there is nothing in it better than the faithful service of
the heart; so rendered and so free from any mercenary taint, he had
such an exalted respect for it, that in the retributive arrangements
made by his own mind--we all make such arrangements, more or less--
he stationed Miss Pross much nearer to the lower Angels than many
ladies immeasurably better got up both by Nature and Art, who had
balances at Tellson's.

"There never was, nor will be, but one man worthy of Ladybird," said
Miss Pross; "and that was my brother Solomon, if he hadn't made a
mistake in life."

Here again:  Mr. Lorry's inquiries into Miss Pross's personal history
had established the fact that her brother Solomon was a heartless
scoundrel who had stripped her of everything she possessed, as a
stake to speculate with, and had abandoned her in her poverty for
evermore, with no touch of compunction.  Miss Pross's fidelity of
belief in Solomon (deducting a mere trifle for this slight mistake)
was quite a serious matter with Mr. Lorry, and had its weight in his
good opinion of her.

"As we happen to be alone for the moment, and are both people of
business," he said, when they had got back to the drawing-room and
had sat down there in friendly relations, "let me ask you--does the
Doctor, in talking with Lucie, never refer to the shoemaking time, yet?"

"Never."

"And yet keeps that bench and those tools beside him?"

"Ah!" returned Miss Pross, shaking her head.  "But I don't say he
don't refer to it within himself."

"Do you believe that he thinks of it much?"

"I do," said Miss Pross.

"Do you imagine--" Mr. Lorry had begun, when Miss Pross took him up
short with:

"Never imagine anything.  Have no imagination at all."

"I stand corrected; do you suppose--you go so far as to suppose, sometimes?"

"Now and then," said Miss Pross.

"Do you suppose," Mr. Lorry went on, with a laughing twinkle in his
bright eye, as it looked kindly at her, "that Doctor Manette has any
theory of his own, preserved through all those years, relative to the
cause of his being so oppressed; perhaps, even to the name of his
oppressor?"

"I don't suppose anything about it but what Ladybird tells me."

"And that is--?"

"That she thinks he has."

"Now don't be angry at my asking all these questions; because I am a
mere dull man of business, and you are a woman of business."

"Dull?" Miss Pross inquired, with placidity.

Rather wishing his modest adjective away, Mr. Lorry replied, "No, no,
no. Surely not.  To return to business:--Is it not remarkable that
Doctor Manette, unquestionably innocent of any crane as we are all
well assured he is, should never touch upon that question?  I will not
say with me, though he had business relations with me many years ago,
and we are now intimate; I will say with the fair daughter to whom he
is so devotedly attached, and who is so devotedly attached to him?
Believe me, Miss Pross, I don't approach the topic with you, out of
curiosity, but out of zealous interest."

"Well!  To the best of my understanding, and bad's the best,
you'll tell me," said Miss Pross, softened by the tone of the apology,
"he is afraid of the whole subject."

"Afraid?"

"It's plain enough, I should think, why he may be.  It's a dreadful
remembrance.  Besides that, his loss of himself grew out of it.
Not knowing how he lost himself, or how he recovered himself, he may
never feel certain of not losing himself again.  That alone wouldn't
make the subject pleasant, I should think."

It was a profounder remark than Mr. Lorry had looked for.  "True,"
said he, "and fearful to reflect upon.  Yet, a doubt lurks in my mind,
Miss Pross, whether it is good for Doctor Manette to have that
suppression always shut up within him.  Indeed, it is this doubt and
the uneasiness it sometimes causes me that has led me to our present
confidence."

"Can't be helped," said Miss Pross, shaking her head.  "Touch that
string, and he instantly changes for the worse.  Better leave it
alone.  In short, must leave it alone, like or no like. Sometimes,
he gets up in the dead of the night, and will be heard, by us
overhead there, walking up and down, walking up and down, in his room.
Ladybird has learnt to know then that his mind is walking up and
down, walking up and down, in his old prison.  She hurries to him,
and they go on together, walking up and down, walking up and down,
until he is composed.  But he never says a word of the true reason of
his restlessness, to her, and she finds it best not to hint at it to him.
In silence they go walking up and down together, walking up and down
together, till her love and company have brought him to himself."

Notwithstanding Miss Pross's denial of her own imagination, there was
a perception of the pain of being monotonously haunted by one sad idea,
in her repetition of the phrase, walking up and down, which testified
to her possessing such a thing.

The corner has been mentioned as a wonderful corner for echoes;
it had begun to echo so resoundingly to the tread of coming feet,
that it seemed as though the very mention of that weary pacing to and
fro had set it going.

"Here they are!" said Miss Pross, rising to break up the conference;
"and now we shall have hundreds of people pretty soon!"

It was such a curious corner in its acoustical properties, such a
peculiar Ear of a place, that as Mr. Lorry stood at the open window,
looking for the father and daughter whose steps he heard, he fancied
they would never approach.  Not only would the echoes die away,
as though the steps had gone; but, echoes of other steps that never
came would be heard in their stead, and would die away for good when
they seemed close at hand.  However, father and daughter did at last
appear, and Miss Pross was ready at the street door to receive them.

Miss Pross was a pleasant sight, albeit wild, and red, and grim, taking
off her darling's bonnet when she came up-stairs, and touching it up
with the ends of her handkerchief, and blowing the dust off it, and
folding her mantle ready for laying by, and smoothing her rich hair
with as much pride as she could possibly have taken in her own hair
if she had been the vainest and handsomest of women.  Her darling was
a pleasant sight too, embracing her and thanking her, and protesting
against her taking so much trouble for her--which last she only dared
to do playfully, or Miss Pross, sorely hurt, would have retired to
her own chamber and cried.  The Doctor was a pleasant sight too,
looking on at them, and telling Miss Pross how she spoilt Lucie, in
accents and with eyes that had as much spoiling in them as Miss Pross
had, and would have had more if it were possible.  Mr. Lorry was a
pleasant sight too, beaming at all this in his little wig, and thanking
his bachelor stars for having lighted him in his declining years to a
Home.  But, no Hundreds of people came to see the sights, and Mr. Lorry
looked in vain for the fulfilment of Miss Pross's prediction.

Dinner-time, and still no Hundreds of people.  In the arrangements of
the little household, Miss Pross took charge of the lower regions,
and always acquitted herself marvellously.  Her dinners, of a very
modest quality, were so well cooked and so well served, and so neat
in their contrivances, half English and half French, that nothing
could be better.  Miss Pross's friendship being of the thoroughly
practical kind, she had ravaged Soho and the adjacent provinces, in
search of impoverished French, who, tempted by shillings and half-
crowns, would impart culinary mysteries to her.  From these decayed
sons and daughters of Gaul, she had acquired such wonderful arts,
that the woman and girl who formed the staff of domestics regarded
her as quite a Sorceress, or Cinderella's Godmother:  who would send
out for a fowl, a rabbit, a vegetable or two from the garden, and
change them into anything she pleased.

On Sundays, Miss Pross dined at the Doctor's table, but on other days
persisted in taking her meals at unknown periods, either in the lower
regions, or in her own room on the second floor--a blue chamber,
to which no one but her Ladybird ever gained admittance.  On this
occasion, Miss Pross, responding to Ladybird's pleasant face and
pleasant efforts to please her, unbent exceedingly; so the dinner was
very pleasant, too.

It was an oppressive day, and, after dinner, Lucie proposed that the
wine should be carried out under the plane-tree, and they should sit
there in the air.  As everything turned upon her, and revolved about
her, they went out under the plane-tree, and she carried the wine
down for the special benefit of Mr. Lorry.  She had installed herself,
some time before, as Mr. Lorry's cup-bearer; and while they sat under
the plane-tree, talking, she kept his glass replenished.  Mysterious
backs and ends of houses peeped at them as they talked, and the
plane-tree whispered to them in its own way above their heads.

Still, the Hundreds of people did not present themselves.  Mr. Darnay
presented himself while they were sitting under the plane-tree,
but he was only One.

Doctor Manette received him kindly, and so did Lucie.  But, Miss
Pross suddenly became afflicted with a twitching in the head and
body, and retired into the house.  She was not unfrequently the
victim of this disorder, and she called it, in familiar conversation,
"a fit of the jerks."

The Doctor was in his best condition, and looked specially young.
The resemblance between him and Lucie was very strong at such times,
and as they sat side by side, she leaning on his shoulder, and he
resting his arm on the back of her chair, it was very agreeable to
trace the likeness.

He had been talking all day, on many subjects, and with unusual vivacity.
"Pray, Doctor Manette," said Mr. Darnay, as they sat under the
plane-tree--and he said it in the natural pursuit of the topic in
hand, which happened to be the old buildings of London--"have you
seen much of the Tower?"

"Lucie and I have been there; but only casually.  We have seen enough
of it, to know that it teems with interest; little more."

"_I_ have been there, as you remember," said Darnay, with a smile,
though reddening a little angrily, "in another character, and not in
a character that gives facilities for seeing much of it.  They told
me a curious thing when I was there."

"What was that?" Lucie asked.

"In making some alterations, the workmen came upon an old dungeon,
which had been, for many years, built up and forgotten.  Every stone
of its inner wall was covered by inscriptions which had been carved
by prisoners--dates, names, complaints, and prayers.  Upon a corner
stone in an angle of the wall, one prisoner, who seemed to have gone
to execution, had cut as his last work, three letters.  They were
done with some very poor instrument, and hurriedly, with an unsteady
hand.  At first, they were read as D. I. C.; but, on being more
carefully examined, the last letter was found to be G. There was no
record or legend of any prisoner with those initials, and many
fruitless guesses were made what the name could have been.
At length, it was suggested that the letters were not initials, but
the complete word, DiG.  The floor was examined very carefully under
the inscription, and, in the earth beneath a stone, or tile, or some
fragment of paving, were found the ashes of a paper, mingled with the
ashes of a small leathern case or bag.  What the unknown prisoner had
written will never be read, but he had written something, and hidden
it away to keep it from the gaoler."

"My father," exclaimed Lucie, "you are ill!"

He had suddenly started up, with his hand to his head.  His manner
and his look quite terrified them all.

"No, my dear, not ill.  There are large drops of rain falling,
and they made me start.  We had better go in."

He recovered himself almost instantly.  Rain was really falling in
large drops, and he showed the back of his hand with rain-drops on it.
But, he said not a single word in reference to the discovery that had
been told of, and, as they went into the house, the business eye of
Mr. Lorry either detected, or fancied it detected, on his face, as it
turned towards Charles Darnay, the same singular look that had been
upon it when it turned towards him in the passages of the Court House.

He recovered himself so quickly, however, that Mr. Lorry had doubts
of his business eye.  The arm of the golden giant in the hall was not
more steady than he was, when he stopped under it to remark to them
that he was not yet proof against slight surprises (if he ever would
be), and that the rain had startled him.

Tea-time, and Miss Pross making tea, with another fit of the jerks
upon her, and yet no Hundreds of people.  Mr. Carton had lounged in,
but he made only Two.

The night was so very sultry, that although they sat with doors and
windows open, they were overpowered by heat.  When the tea-table was
done with, they all moved to one of the windows, and looked out into
the heavy twilight.  Lucie sat by her father; Darnay sat beside her;
Carton leaned against a window.  The curtains were long and white,
and some of the thunder-gusts that whirled into the corner, caught
them up to the ceiling, and waved them like spectral wings.

"The rain-drops are still falling, large, heavy, and few," said
Doctor Manette.  "It comes slowly."

"It comes surely," said Carton.

They spoke low, as people watching and waiting mostly do; as people
in a dark room, watching and waiting for Lightning, always do.

There was a great hurry in the streets of people speeding away to get
shelter before the storm broke; the wonderful corner for echoes
resounded with the echoes of footsteps coming and going, yet not a
footstep was there.

"A multitude of people, and yet a solitude!" said Darnay, when they
had listened for a while.

"Is it not impressive, Mr. Darnay?" asked Lucie.  "Sometimes, I have
sat here of an evening, until I have fancied--but even the shade of a
foolish fancy makes me shudder to-night, when all is so black and
solemn--"

"Let us shudder too.  We may know what it is."

"It will seem nothing to you.  Such whims are only impressive as we
originate them, I think; they are not to be communicated.  I have
sometimes sat alone here of an evening, listening, until I have made
the echoes out to be the echoes of all the footsteps that are coming
by-and-bye into our lives."

"There is a great crowd coming one day into our lives, if that be so,"
Sydney Carton struck in, in his moody way.

The footsteps were incessant, and the hurry of them became more and
more rapid.  The corner echoed and re-echoed with the tread of feet;
some, as it seemed, under the windows; some, as it seemed, in the room;
some coming, some going, some breaking off, some stopping altogether;
all in the distant streets, and not one within sight.

"Are all these footsteps destined to come to all of us, Miss Manette,
or are we to divide them among us?"

"I don't know, Mr. Darnay; I told you it was a foolish fancy, but you
asked for it.  When I have yielded myself to it, I have been alone,
and then I have imagined them the footsteps of the people who are to
come into my life, and my father's."

"I take them into mine!" said Carton.  "_I_ ask no questions and make
no stipulations.  There is a great crowd bearing down upon us, Miss
Manette, and I see them--by the Lightning."  He added the last words,
after there had been a vivid flash which had shown him lounging in
the window.

"And I hear them!" he added again, after a peal of thunder.
"Here they come, fast, fierce, and furious!"

It was the rush and roar of rain that he typified, and it stopped him,
for no voice could be heard in it.  A memorable storm of thunder and
lightning broke with that sweep of water, and there was not a moment's
interval in crash, and fire, and rain, until after the moon rose at
midnight.

The great bell of Saint Paul's was striking one in the cleared air,
when Mr. Lorry, escorted by Jerry, high-booted and bearing a lantern,
set forth on his return-passage to Clerkenwell.  There were solitary
patches of road on the way between Soho and Clerkenwell, and Mr. Lorry,
mindful of foot-pads, always retained Jerry for this service:  though
it was usually performed a good two hours earlier.

"What a night it has been!  Almost a night, Jerry," said Mr. Lorry,
"to bring the dead out of their graves."

"I never see the night myself, master--nor yet I don't expect to--
what would do that," answered Jerry.

"Good night, Mr. Carton," said the man of business.  "Good night,
Mr. Darnay.  Shall we ever see such a night again, together!"

Perhaps.  Perhaps, see the great crowd of people with its rush and
roar, bearing down upon them, too.



VII

Monseigneur in Town


Monseigneur, one of the great lords in power at the Court, held his
fortnightly reception in his grand hotel in Paris.  Monseigneur was
in his inner room, his sanctuary of sanctuaries, the Holiest of
Holiests to the crowd of worshippers in the suite of rooms without.
Monseigneur was about to take his chocolate.  Monseigneur could
swallow a great many things with ease, and was by some few sullen
minds supposed to be rather rapidly swallowing France; but, his
morning's chocolate could not so much as get into the throat of
Monseigneur, without the aid of four strong men besides the Cook.

Yes.  It took four men, all four ablaze with gorgeous decoration,
and the Chief of them unable to exist with fewer than two gold
watches in his pocket, emulative of the noble and chaste fashion set
by Monseigneur, to conduct the happy chocolate to Monseigneur's lips.
One lacquey carried the chocolate-pot into the sacred presence;
a second, milled and frothed the chocolate with the little instrument
he bore for that function; a third, presented the favoured napkin;
a fourth (he of the two gold watches), poured the chocolate out.
It was impossible for Monseigneur to dispense with one of these
attendants on the chocolate and hold his high place under the
admiring Heavens.  Deep would have been the blot upon his escutcheon
if his chocolate had been ignobly waited on by only three men; he
must have died of two.

Monseigneur had been out at a little supper last night, where the
Comedy and the Grand Opera were charmingly represented.  Monseigneur
was out at a little supper most nights, with fascinating company.
So polite and so impressible was Monseigneur, that the Comedy and
the Grand Opera had far more influence with him in the tiresome
articles of state affairs and state secrets, than the needs of all
France.  A happy circumstance for France, as the like always is for
all countries similarly favoured!--always was for England (by way of
example), in the regretted days of the merry Stuart who sold it.

Monseigneur had one truly noble idea of general public business,
which was, to let everything go on in its own way; of particular
public business, Monseigneur had the other truly noble idea that it
must all go his way--tend to his own power and pocket.  Of his
pleasures, general and particular, Monseigneur had the other truly
noble idea, that the world was made for them.  The text of his order
(altered from the original by only a pronoun, which is not much) ran:
"The earth and the fulness thereof are mine, saith Monseigneur."

Yet, Monseigneur had slowly found that vulgar embarrassments crept
into his affairs, both private and public; and he had, as to both
classes of affairs, allied himself perforce with a Farmer-General.
As to finances public, because Monseigneur could not make anything
at all of them, and must consequently let them out to somebody who
could; as to finances private, because Farmer-Generals were rich, and
Monseigneur, after generations of great luxury and expense, was
growing poor.  Hence Monseigneur had taken his sister from a convent,
while there was yet time to ward off the impending veil, the cheapest
garment she could wear, and had bestowed her as a prize upon a very
rich Farmer-General, poor in family.  Which Farmer-General, carrying
an appropriate cane with a golden apple on the top of it, was now
among the company in the outer rooms, much prostrated before by
mankind--always excepting superior mankind of the blood of Monseigneur,
who, his own wife included, looked down upon him with the loftiest
contempt.

A sumptuous man was the Farmer-General.  Thirty horses stood in his
stables, twenty-four male domestics sat in his halls, six body-women
waited on his wife.  As one who pretended to do nothing but plunder
and forage where he could, the Farmer-General--howsoever his
matrimonial relations conduced to social morality--was at least the
greatest reality among the personages who attended at the hotel of
Monseigneur that day.

For, the rooms, though a beautiful scene to look at, and adorned with
every device of decoration that the taste and skill of the time could
achieve, were, in truth, not a sound business; considered with any
reference to the scarecrows in the rags and nightcaps elsewhere
(and not so far off, either, but that the watching towers of Notre
Dame, almost equidistant from the two extremes, could see them both),
they would have been an exceedingly uncomfortable business--if that
could have been anybody's business, at the house of Monseigneur.
Military officers destitute of military knowledge; naval officers
with no idea of a ship; civil officers without a notion of affairs;
brazen ecclesiastics, of the worst world worldly, with sensual eyes,
loose tongues, and looser lives; all totally unfit for their several
callings, all lying horribly in pretending to belong to them, but all
nearly or remotely of the order of Monseigneur, and therefore foisted
on all public employments from which anything was to be got; these were
to be told off by the score and the score.  People not immediately
connected with Monseigneur or the State, yet equally unconnected with
anything that was real, or with lives passed in travelling by any
straight road to any true earthly end, were no less abundant.
Doctors who made great fortunes out of dainty remedies for imaginary
disorders that never existed, smiled upon their courtly patients in
the ante-chambers of Monseigneur.  Projectors who had discovered
every kind of remedy for the little evils with which the State was
touched, except the remedy of setting to work in earnest to root out
a single sin, poured their distracting babble into any ears they
could lay hold of, at the reception of Monseigneur.  Unbelieving
Philosophers who were remodelling the world with words, and making
card-towers of Babel to scale the skies with, talked with Unbelieving
Chemists who had an eye on the transmutation of metals, at this
wonderful gathering accumulated by Monseigneur.  Exquisite gentlemen
of the finest breeding, which was at that remarkable time--and has
been since--to be known by its fruits of indifference to every
natural subject of human interest, were in the most exemplary state
of exhaustion, at the hotel of Monseigneur.  Such homes had these
various notabilities left behind them in the fine world of Paris,
that the spies among the assembled devotees of Monseigneur--forming a
goodly half of the polite company--would have found it hard to
discover among the angels of that sphere one solitary wife, who, in
her manners and appearance, owned to being a Mother.  Indeed, except
for the mere act of bringing a troublesome creature into this world--
which does not go far towards the realisation of the name of mother--
there was no such thing known to the fashion.  Peasant women kept the
unfashionable babies close, and brought them up, and charming grandmammas
of sixty dressed and supped as at twenty.

The leprosy of unreality disfigured every human creature in attendance
upon Monseigneur.  In the outermost room were half a dozen exceptional
people who had had, for a few years, some vague misgiving in them
that things in general were going rather wrong.  As a promising way
of setting them right, half of the half-dozen had become members of a
fantastic sect of Convulsionists, and were even then considering within
themselves whether they should foam, rage, roar, and turn cataleptic
on the spot--thereby setting up a highly intelligible finger-post to
the Future, for Monseigneur's guidance.  Besides these Dervishes,
were other three who had rushed into another sect, which mended
matters with a jargon about "the Centre of Truth:" holding that Man
had got out of the Centre of Truth--which did not need much
demonstration--but had not got out of the Circumference, and that he
was to be kept from flying out of the Circumference, and was even to
be shoved back into the Centre, by fasting and seeing of spirits.
Among these, accordingly, much discoursing with spirits went on--and
it did a world of good which never became manifest.

But, the comfort was, that all the company at the grand hotel of
Monseigneur were perfectly dressed.  If the Day of Judgment had only
been ascertained to be a dress day, everybody there would have been
eternally correct.  Such frizzling and powdering and sticking up of
hair, such delicate complexions artificially preserved and mended,
such gallant swords to look at, and such delicate honour to the sense
of smell, would surely keep anything going, for ever and ever.
The exquisite gentlemen of the finest breeding wore little pendent
trinkets that chinked as they languidly moved; these golden fetters
rang like precious little bells; and what with that ringing, and with
the rustle of silk and brocade and fine linen, there was a flutter in
the air that fanned Saint Antoine and his devouring hunger far away.

Dress was the one unfailing talisman and charm used for keeping all
things in their places.  Everybody was dressed for a Fancy Ball that
was never to leave off.  From the Palace of the Tuileries, through
Monseigneur and the whole Court, through the Chambers, the Tribunals
of Justice, and all society (except the scarecrows), the Fancy Ball
descended to the Common Executioner:  who, in pursuance of the charm,
was required to officiate "frizzled, powdered, in a gold-laced coat,
pumps, and white silk stockings."  At the gallows and the wheel--the
axe was a rarity--Monsieur Paris, as it was the episcopal mode among
his brother Professors of the provinces, Monsieur Orleans, and the
rest, to call him, presided in this dainty dress.  And who among the
company at Monseigneur's reception in that seventeen hundred and
eightieth year of our Lord, could possibly doubt, that a system
rooted in a frizzled hangman, powdered, gold-laced, pumped, and
white-silk stockinged, would see the very stars out!

Monseigneur having eased his four men of their burdens and taken his
chocolate, caused the doors of the Holiest of Holiests to be thrown
open, and issued forth.  Then, what submission, what cringing and
fawning, what servility, what abject humiliation!  As to bowing down
in body and spirit, nothing in that way was left for Heaven--which
may have been one among other reasons why the worshippers of
Monseigneur never troubled it.

Bestowing a word of promise here and a smile there, a whisper on one
happy slave and a wave of the hand on another, Monseigneur affably
passed through his rooms to the remote region of the Circumference of
Truth.  There, Monseigneur turned, and came back again, and so in due
course of time got himself shut up in his sanctuary by the chocolate
sprites, and was seen no more.

The show being over, the flutter in the air became quite a little
storm, and the precious little bells went ringing downstairs.
There was soon but one person left of all the crowd, and he, with his
hat under his arm and his snuff-box in his hand, slowly passed among
the mirrors on his way out.

"I devote you," said this person, stopping at the last door on his
way, and turning in the direction of the sanctuary, "to the Devil!"

With that, he shook the snuff from his fingers as if he had shaken
the dust from his feet, and quietly walked downstairs.

He was a man of about sixty, handsomely dressed, haughty in manner,
and with a face like a fine mask.  A face of a transparent paleness;
every feature in it clearly defined; one set expression on it.
The nose, beautifully formed otherwise, was very slightly pinched at
the top of each nostril.  In those two compressions, or dints, the
only little change that the face ever showed, resided.  They persisted
in changing colour sometimes, and they would be occasionally dilated
and contracted by something like a faint pulsation; then, they gave a
look of treachery, and cruelty, to the whole countenance.  Examined
with attention, its capacity of helping such a look was to be found
in the line of the mouth, and the lines of the orbits of the eyes,
being much too horizontal and thin; still, in the effect of the face
made, it was a handsome face, and a remarkable one.

Its owner went downstairs into the courtyard, got into his carriage,
and drove away.  Not many people had talked with him at the reception;
he had stood in a little space apart, and Monseigneur might have been
warmer in his manner.  It appeared, under the circumstances, rather
agreeable to him to see the common people dispersed before his horses,
and often barely escaping from being run down.  His man drove as if
he were charging an enemy, and the furious recklessness of the man
brought no check into the face, or to the lips, of the master.  The
complaint had sometimes made itself audible, even in that deaf city
and dumb age, that, in the narrow streets without footways, the fierce
patrician custom of hard driving endangered and maimed the mere vulgar
in a barbarous manner.  But, few cared enough for that to think of it
a second time, and, in this matter, as in all others, the common
wretches were left to get out of their difficulties as they could.

With a wild rattle and clatter, and an inhuman abandonment of
consideration not easy to be understood in these days, the carriage
dashed through streets and swept round corners, with women screaming
before it, and men clutching each other and clutching children out of
its way.  At last, swooping at a street corner by a fountain, one of
its wheels came to a sickening little jolt, and there was a loud cry
from a number of voices, and the horses reared and plunged.

But for the latter inconvenience, the carriage probably would not
have stopped; carriages were often known to drive on, and leave their
wounded behind, and why not?  But the frightened valet had got down in
a hurry, and there were twenty hands at the horses' bridles.

"What has gone wrong?" said Monsieur, calmly looking out.

A tall man in a nightcap had caught up a bundle from among the feet
of the horses, and had laid it on the basement of the fountain,
and was down in the mud and wet, howling over it like a wild animal.

"Pardon, Monsieur the Marquis!" said a ragged and submissive man,
"it is a child."

"Why does he make that abominable noise?  Is it his child?"

"Excuse me, Monsieur the Marquis--it is a pity--yes."

The fountain was a little removed; for the street opened, where it
was, into a space some ten or twelve yards square.  As the tall man
suddenly got up from the ground, and came running at the carriage,
Monsieur the Marquis clapped his hand for an instant on his sword-hilt.

"Killed!" shrieked the man, in wild desperation, extending both arms
at their length above his head, and staring at him.  "Dead!"

The people closed round, and looked at Monsieur the Marquis.
There was nothing revealed by the many eyes that looked at him but
watchfulness and eagerness; there was no visible menacing or anger.
Neither did the people say anything; after the first cry, they had
been silent, and they remained so.  The voice of the submissive man
who had spoken, was flat and tame in its extreme submission.
Monsieur the Marquis ran his eyes over them all, as if they had been
mere rats come out of their holes.

He took out his purse.

"It is extraordinary to me," said he, "that you people cannot take
care of yourselves and your children.  One or the other of you is for
ever in the, way.  How do I know what injury you have done my horses.
See!  Give him that."

He threw out a gold coin for the valet to pick up, and all the heads
craned forward that all the eyes might look down at it as it fell.
The tall man called out again with a most unearthly cry, "Dead!"

He was arrested by the quick arrival of another man, for whom the
rest made way.  On seeing him, the miserable creature fell upon his
shoulder, sobbing and crying, and pointing to the fountain, where
some women were stooping over the motionless bundle, and moving
gently about it.  They were as silent, however, as the men.

"I know all, I know all," said the last comer.  "Be a brave man, my
Gaspard!  It is better for the poor little plaything to die so, than
to live.  It has died in a moment without pain.  Could it have lived
an hour as happily?"

"You are a philosopher, you there," said the, Marquis, smiling.
"How do they call you?"

"They call me Defarge."

"Of what trade?"

"Monsieur the Marquis, vendor of wine."

"Pick up that, philosopher and vendor of wine," said the Marquis,
throwing him another gold coin, "and spend it as you will.
The horses there; are they right?"

Without deigning to look at the assemblage a second time, Monsieur
the Marquis leaned back in his seat, and was just being driven away
with the air of a gentleman who had accidentally broke some common
thing, and had paid for it, and could afford to pay for it; when his
ease was suddenly disturbed by a coin flying into his carriage,
and ringing on its floor.

"Hold!" said Monsieur the Marquis.  "Hold the horses!  Who threw that?"

He looked to the spot where Defarge the vendor of wine had stood,
a moment before; but the wretched father was grovelling on his face
on the pavement in that spot, and the figure that stood beside him
was the figure of a dark stout woman, knitting.

"You dogs!" said the Marquis, but smoothly, and with an unchanged front,
except as to the spots on his nose:  "I would ride over any of you
very willingly, and exterminate you from the earth. If I knew which
rascal threw at the carriage, and if that brigand were sufficiently
near it, he should be crushed under the wheels."

So cowed was their condition, and so long and hard their experience
of what such a man could do to them, within the law and beyond it,
that not a voice, or a hand, or even an eye was raised.  Among the
men, not one.  But the woman who stood knitting looked up steadily,
and looked the Marquis in the face.  It was not for his dignity to
notice it; his contemptuous eyes passed over her, and over all the
other rats; and he leaned back in his seat again, and gave the word
"Go on!"

He was driven on, and other carriages came whirling by in quick
succession; the Minister, the State-Projector, the Farmer-General,
the Doctor, the Lawyer, the Ecclesiastic, the Grand Opera, the
Comedy, the whole Fancy Ball in a bright continuous flow, came
whirling by.  The rats had crept out of their holes to look on,
and they remained looking on for hours; soldiers and police often
passing between them and the spectacle, and making a barrier behind
which they slunk, and through which they peeped.  The father had long
ago taken up his bundle and bidden himself away with it, when the
women who had tended the bundle while it lay on the base of the
fountain, sat there watching the running of the water and the rolling
of the Fancy Ball--when the one woman who had stood conspicuous,
knitting, still knitted on with the steadfastness of Fate.  The water
of the fountain ran, the swift river ran, the day ran into evening,
so much life in the city ran into death according to rule, time and
tide waited for no man, the rats were sleeping close together in
their dark holes again, the Fancy Ball was lighted up at supper,
all things ran their course.



VIII

Monseigneur in the Country


A beautiful landscape, with the corn bright in it, but not abundant.
Patches of poor rye where com should have been, patches of poor peas
and beans, patches of most coarse vegetable substitutes for wheat.
On inanimate nature, as on the men and women who cultivated it,
a prevalent tendency towards an appearance of vegetating
unwillingly--a dejected disposition to give up, and wither away.

Monsieur the Marquis in his travelling carriage (which might have
been lighter), conducted by four post-horses and two postilions,
fagged up a steep hill.  A blush on the countenance of Monsieur the
Marquis was no impeachment of his high breeding; it was not from
within; it was occasioned by an external circumstance beyond his
control--the setting sun.

The sunset struck so brilliantly into the travelling carriage when it
gained the hill-top, that its occupant was steeped in crimson.
"It will die out," said Monsieur the Marquis, glancing at his hands,
"directly."

In effect, the sun was so low that it dipped at the moment.  When the
heavy drag had been adjusted to the wheel, and the carriage slid down
hill, with a cinderous smell, in a cloud of dust, the red glow departed
quickly; the sun and the Marquis going down together, there was no
glow left when the drag was taken off.

But, there remained a broken country, bold and open, a little village
at the bottom of the hill, a broad sweep and rise beyond it, a church-
tower, a windmill, a forest for the chase, and a crag with a fortress
on it used as a prison.  Round upon all these darkening objects as
the night drew on, the Marquis looked, with the air of one who was
coming near home.

The village had its one poor street, with its poor brewery, poor
tannery, poor tavern, poor stable-yard for relays of post-horses,
poor fountain, all usual poor appointments.  It had its poor people
too.  All its people were poor, and many of them were sitting at
their doors, shredding spare onions and the like for supper, while
many were at the fountain, washing leaves, and grasses, and any such
small yieldings of the earth that could be eaten.  Expressive sips of
what made them poor, were not wanting; the tax for the state, the tax
for the church, the tax for the lord, tax local and tax general, were
to be paid here and to be paid there, according to solemn inscription
in the little village, until the wonder was, that there was any
village left unswallowed.

Few children were to be seen, and no dogs.  As to the men and women,
their choice on earth was stated in the prospect--Life on the lowest
terms that could sustain it, down in the little village under the
mill; or captivity and Death in the dominant prison on the crag.

Heralded by a courier in advance, and by the cracking of his
postilions' whips, which twined snake-like about their heads in the
evening air, as if he came attended by the Furies, Monsieur the
Marquis drew up in his travelling carriage at the posting-house gate.
It was hard by the fountain, and the peasants suspended their
operations to look at him.  He looked at them, and saw in them,
without knowing it, the slow sure filing down of misery-worn face and
figure, that was to make the meagreness of Frenchmen an English
superstition which should survive the truth through the best part of
a hundred years.

Monsieur the Marquis cast his eyes over the submissive faces that
drooped before him, as the like of himself had drooped before
Monseigneur of the Court--only the difference was, that these faces
drooped merely to suffer and not to propitiate--when a grizzled
mender of the roads joined the group.

"Bring me hither that fellow!" said the Marquis to the courier.

The fellow was brought, cap in hand, and the other fellows closed
round to look and listen, in the manner of the people at the Paris
fountain.

"I passed you on the road?"

"Monseigneur, it is true.  I had the honour of being passed on the road."

"Coming up the hill, and at the top of the hill, both?"

"Monseigneur, it is true."

"What did you look at, so fixedly?"

"Monseigneur, I looked at the man."

He stooped a little, and with his tattered blue cap pointed under the
carriage.  All his fellows stooped to look under the carriage.

"What man, pig?  And why look there?"

"Pardon, Monseigneur; he swung by the chain of the shoe--the drag."

"Who?" demanded the traveller.

"Monseigneur, the man."

"May the Devil carry away these idiots!  How do you can the man?
You know all the men of this part of the country.  Who was he?"

"Your clemency, Monseigneur!  He was not of this part of the country.
Of all the days of my life, I never saw him."

"Swinging by the chain?  To be suffocated?"

"With your gracious permission, that was the wonder of it,
Monseigneur.  His head hanging over--like this!"

He turned himself sideways to the carriage, and leaned back, with his
face thrown up to the sky, and his head hanging down; then recovered
himself, fumbled with his cap, and made a bow.

"What was he like?"

"Monseigneur, he was whiter than the miller.  All covered with dust,
white as a spectre, tall as a spectre!"

The picture produced an immense sensation in the little crowd;
but all eyes, without comparing notes with other eyes, looked at
Monsieur the Marquis.  Perhaps, to observe whether he had any spectre
on his conscience.

"Truly, you did well," said the Marquis, felicitously sensible that
such vermin were not to ruffle him, "to see a thief accompanying my
carriage, and not open that great mouth of yours.  Bah!  Put him aside,
Monsieur Gabelle!"

Monsieur Gabelle was the Postmaster, and some other taxing functionary
united; he had come out with great obsequiousness to assist at this
examination, and had held the examined by the drapery of his arm in
an official manner.

"Bah!  Go aside!" said Monsieur Gabelle.

"Lay hands on this stranger if he seeks to lodge in your village
to-night, and be sure that his business is honest, Gabelle."

"Monseigneur, I am flattered to devote myself to your orders."

"Did he run away, fellow?--where is that Accursed?"

The accursed was already under the carriage with some half-dozen
particular friends, pointing out the chain with his blue cap.
Some half-dozen other particular friends promptly hauled him out,
and presented him breathless to Monsieur the Marquis.

"Did the man run away, Dolt, when we stopped for the drag?"

"Monseigneur, he precipitated himself over the hill-side, head first,
as a person plunges into the river."

"See to it, Gabelle.  Go on!"

The half-dozen who were peering at the chain were still among the
wheels, like sheep; the wheels turned so suddenly that they were
lucky to save their skins and bones; they had very little else to
save, or they might not have been so fortunate.

The burst with which the carriage started out of the village and up
the rise beyond, was soon checked by the steepness of the hill.
Gradually, it subsided to a foot pace, swinging and lumbering upward
among the many sweet scents of a summer night.  The postilions, with
a thousand gossamer gnats circling about them in lieu of the Furies,
quietly mended the points to the lashes of their whips; the valet
walked by the horses; the courier was audible, trotting on ahead into
the dun distance.

At the steepest point of the hill there was a little burial-ground,
with a Cross and a new large figure of Our Saviour on it; it was a
poor figure in wood, done by some inexperienced rustic carver, but he
had studied the figure from the life--his own life, maybe--for it was
dreadfully spare and thin.

To this distressful emblem of a great distress that had long been
growing worse, and was not at its worst, a woman was kneeling.
She turned her head as the carriage came up to her, rose quickly,
and presented herself at the carriage-door.

"It is you, Monseigneur!  Monseigneur, a petition."

With an exclamation of impatience, but with his unchangeable face,
Monseigneur looked out.

"How, then!  What is it?  Always petitions!"

"Monseigneur.  For the love of the great God!  My husband, the forester."

"What of your husband, the forester?  Always the same with you people.
He cannot pay something?"

"He has paid all, Monseigneur.  He is dead."

"Well!  He is quiet.  Can I restore him to you?"

"Alas, no, Monseigneur!  But he lies yonder, under a little heap of
poor grass."

"Well?"

"Monseigneur, there are so many little heaps of poor grass?"

"Again, well?"

She looked an old woman, but was young.  Her manner was one of
passionate grief; by turns she clasped her veinous and knotted hands
together with wild energy, and laid one of them on the carriage-door
--tenderly, caressingly, as if it had been a human breast, and could
be expected to feel the appealing touch.

"Monseigneur, hear me!  Monseigneur, hear my petition!  My husband
died of want; so many die of want; so many more will die of want."

"Again, well?  Can I feed them?"

"Monseigneur, the good God knows; but I don't ask it.  My petition is,
that a morsel of stone or wood, with my husband's name, may be placed
over him to show where he lies.  Otherwise, the place will be quickly
forgotten, it will never be found when I am dead of the same malady,
I shall be laid under some other heap of poor grass.  Monseigneur,
they are so many, they increase so fast, there is so much want.
Monseigneur!  Monseigneur!"

The valet had put her away from the door, the carriage had broken
into a brisk trot, the postilions had quickened the pace, she was
left far behind, and Monseigneur, again escorted by the Furies, was
rapidly diminishing the league or two of distance that remained
between him and his chateau.

The sweet scents of the summer night rose all around him, and rose,
as the rain falls, impartially, on the dusty, ragged, and toil-worn
group at the fountain not far away; to whom the mender of roads, with
the aid of the blue cap without which he was nothing, still enlarged
upon his man like a spectre, as long as they could bear it.
By degrees, as they could bear no more, they dropped off one by one,
and lights twinkled in little casements; which lights, as the
casements darkened, and more stars came out, seemed to have shot up
into the sky instead of having been extinguished.

The shadow of a large high-roofed house, and of many over-hanging
trees, was upon Monsieur the Marquis by that time; and the shadow was
exchanged for the light of a flambeau, as his carriage stopped,
and the great door of his chateau was opened to him.

"Monsieur Charles, whom I expect; is he arrived from England?"

"Monseigneur, not yet."



IX

The Gorgon's Head


It was a heavy mass of building, that chateau of Monsieur the Marquis,
with a large stone courtyard before it, and two stone sweeps of
staircase meeting in a stone terrace before the principal door.
A stony business altogether, with heavy stone balustrades, and stone
urns, and stone flowers, and stone faces of men, and stone heads of
lions, in all directions.  As if the Gorgon's head had surveyed it,
when it was finished, two centuries ago.

Up the broad flight of shallow steps, Monsieur the Marquis, flambeau
preceded, went from his carriage, sufficiently disturbing the darkness
to elicit loud remonstrance from an owl in the roof of the great pile
of stable building away among the trees.  All else was so quiet, that
the flambeau carried up the steps, and the other flambeau held at the
great door, burnt as if they were in a close room of state, instead
of being in the open night-air.  Other sound than the owl's voice
there was none, save the failing of a fountain into its stone basin;
for, it was one of those dark nights that hold their breath by the hour
together, and then heave a long low sigh, and hold their breath again.

The great door clanged behind him, and Monsieur the Marquis crossed
a hall grim with certain old boar-spears, swords, and knives of the
chase; grimmer with certain heavy riding-rods and riding-whips, of
which many a peasant, gone to his benefactor Death, had felt the
weight when his lord was angry.

Avoiding the larger rooms, which were dark and made fast for the
night, Monsieur the Marquis, with his flambeau-bearer going on before,
went up the staircase to a door in a corridor.  This thrown open,
admitted him to his own private apartment of three rooms:
his bed-chamber and two others.  High vaulted rooms with cool
uncarpeted floors, great dogs upon the hearths for the burning
of wood in winter time, and all luxuries befitting the state
of a marquis in a luxurious age and country.  The fashion
of the last Louis but one, of the line that was never to break
--the fourteenth Louis--was conspicuous in their rich furniture;
but, it was diversified by many objects that were illustrations
of old pages in the history of France.

A supper-table was laid for two, in the third of the rooms; a round
room, in one of the chateau's four extinguisher-topped towers.
A small lofty room, with its window wide open, and the wooden
jalousie-blinds closed, so that the dark night only showed in slight
horizontal lines of black, alternating with their broad lines of
stone colour.

"My nephew," said the Marquis, glancing at the supper preparation;
"they said he was not arrived."

Nor was he; but, he had been expected with Monseigneur.

"Ah!  It is not probable he will arrive to-night; nevertheless, leave
the table as it is.  I shall be ready in a quarter of an hour."

In a quarter of an hour Monseigneur was ready, and sat down alone
to his sumptuous and choice supper. His chair was opposite to the
window, and he had taken his soup, and was raising his glass of
Bordeaux to his lips, when he put it down.

"What is that?" he calmly asked, looking with attention at the
horizontal lines of black and stone colour.

"Monseigneur?  That?"

"Outside the blinds.  Open the blinds."

It was done.

"Well?"

"Monseigneur, it is nothing.  The trees and the night are all that
are here."

The servant who spoke, had thrown the blinds wide, had looked out
into the vacant darkness, and stood with that blank behind him,
looking round for instructions.

"Good," said the imperturbable master.  "Close them again."

That was done too, and the Marquis went on with his supper.  He was
half way through it, when he again stopped with his glass in his
hand, hearing the sound of wheels.  It came on briskly, and came up
to the front of the chateau.

"Ask who is arrived."

It was the nephew of Monseigneur.  He had been some few leagues
behind Monseigneur, early in the afternoon.  He had diminished the
distance rapidly, but not so rapidly as to come up with Monseigneur
on the road.  He had heard of Monseigneur, at the posting-houses,
as being before him.

He was to be told (said Monseigneur) that supper awaited him then and
there, and that he was prayed to come to it.  In a little while he came.
He had been known in England as Charles Darnay.

Monseigneur received him in a courtly manner, but they did not shake hands.

"You left Paris yesterday, sir?" he said to Monseigneur, as he took
his seat at table.

"Yesterday.  And you?"

"I come direct."

"From London?"

"Yes."

"You have been a long time coming," said the Marquis, with a smile.

"On the contrary; I come direct."

"Pardon me!  I mean, not a long time on the journey; a long time
intending the journey."

"I have been detained by"--the nephew stopped a moment in his
answer--"various business."

"Without doubt," said the polished uncle.

So long as a servant was present, no other words passed between them.
When coffee had been served and they were alone together, the nephew,
looking at the uncle and meeting the eyes of the face that was like a
fine mask, opened a conversation.

"I have come back, sir, as you anticipate, pursuing the object that
took me away.  It carried me into great and unexpected peril; but it
is a sacred object, and if it had carried me to death I hope it would
have sustained me."

"Not to death," said the uncle; "it is not necessary to say, to death."

"I doubt, sir," returned the nephew, "whether, if it had carried me
to the utmost brink of death, you would have cared to stop me there."

The deepened marks in the nose, and the lengthening of the fine
straight lines in the cruel face, looked ominous as to that; the
uncle made a graceful gesture of protest, which was so clearly a
slight form of good breeding that it was not reassuring.

"Indeed, sir," pursued the nephew, "for anything I know, you may
have expressly worked to give a more suspicious appearance to the
suspicious circumstances that surrounded me."

"No, no, no," said the uncle, pleasantly.

"But, however that may be," resumed the nephew, glancing at him with
deep distrust, "I know that your diplomacy would stop me by any
means, and would know no scruple as to means."

"My friend, I told you so," said the uncle, with a fine pulsation in
the two marks.  "Do me the favour to recall that I told you so, long ago."

"I recall it."

"Thank you," said the Marquise--very sweetly indeed.

His tone lingered in the air, almost like the tone of a musical
instrument.

"In effect, sir," pursued the nephew, "I believe it to be at once
your bad fortune, and my good fortune, that has kept me out of a
prison in France here."

"I do not quite understand," returned the uncle, sipping his coffee.
"Dare I ask you to explain?"

"I believe that if you were not in disgrace with the Court,
and had not been overshadowed by that cloud for years past, a letter
de cachet would have sent me to some fortress indefinitely."

"It is possible," said the uncle, with great calmness.  "For the
honour of the family, I could even resolve to incommode you to that
extent.  Pray excuse me!"

"I perceive that, happily for me, the Reception of the day before
yesterday was, as usual, a cold one," observed the nephew.

"I would not say happily, my friend," returned the uncle, with
refined politeness; "I would not be sure of that.  A good opportunity
for consideration, surrounded by the advantages of solitude, might
influence your destiny to far greater advantage than you influence it
for yourself.  But it is useless to discuss the question.  I am, as
you say, at a disadvantage.  These little instruments of correction,
these gentle aids to the power and honour of families, these slight
favours that might so incommode you, are only to be obtained now by
interest and importunity.  They are sought by so many, and they are
granted (comparatively) to so few!  It used not to be so, but France
in all such things is changed for the worse.  Our not remote
ancestors held the right of life and death over the surrounding
vulgar.  From this room, many such dogs have been taken out to be
hanged; in the next room (my bedroom), one fellow, to our knowledge,
was poniarded on the spot for professing some insolent delicacy
respecting his daughter--HIS daughter?  We have lost many privileges;
a new philosophy has become the mode; and the assertion of our
station, in these days, might (I do not go so far as to say would,
but might) cause us real inconvenience.  All very bad, very bad!"

The Marquis took a gentle little pinch of snuff, and shook his head;
as elegantly despondent as he could becomingly be of a country still
containing himself, that great means of regeneration.

"We have so asserted our station, both in the old time and in the
modern time also," said the nephew, gloomily, "that I believe our
name to be more detested than any name in France."

"Let us hope so," said the uncle.  "Detestation of the high is the
involuntary homage of the low."

"There is not," pursued the nephew, in his former tone, "a face I can
look at, in all this country round about us, which looks at me with
any deference on it but the dark deference of fear and slavery."

"A compliment," said the Marquis, "to the grandeur of the family,
merited by the manner in which the family has sustained its grandeur.
Hah!"  And he took another gentle little pinch of snuff, and lightly
crossed his legs.

But, when his nephew, leaning an elbow on the table, covered his eyes
thoughtfully and dejectedly with his hand, the fine mask looked at him
sideways with a stronger concentration of keenness, closeness, and dislike,
than was comportable with its wearer's assumption of indifference.

"Repression is the only lasting philosophy.  The dark deference of
fear and slavery, my friend," observed the Marquis, "will keep the
dogs obedient to the whip, as long as this roof," looking up to it,
"shuts out the sky."

That might not be so long as the Marquis supposed.  If a picture of
the chateau as it was to be a very few years hence, and of fifty like
it as they too were to be a very few years hence, could have been
shown to him that night, he might have been at a loss to claim his
own from the ghastly, fire-charred, plunder-wrecked rains.  As for
the roof he vaunted, he might have found THAT shutting out the sky
in a new way--to wit, for ever, from the eyes of the bodies into which
its lead was fired, out of the barrels of a hundred thousand muskets.

"Meanwhile," said the Marquis, "I will preserve the honour and repose
of the family, if you will not.  But you must be fatigued.  Shall we
terminate our conference for the night?"

"A moment more."

"An hour, if you please."

"Sir," said the nephew, "we have done wrong, and are reaping the
fruits of wrong."

"WE have done wrong?" repeated the Marquis, with an inquiring
smile, and delicately pointing, first to his nephew, then to himself.

"Our family; our honourable family, whose honour is of so much
account to both of us, in such different ways.  Even in my father's
time, we did a world of wrong, injuring every human creature who came
between us and our pleasure, whatever it was.  Why need I speak of my
father's time, when it is equally yours?  Can I separate my father's
twin-brother, joint inheritor, and next successor, from himself?"

"Death has done that!" said the Marquis.

"And has left me," answered the nephew, "bound to a system that is
frightful to me, responsible for it, but powerless in it; seeking to
execute the last request of my dear mother's lips, and obey the last
look of my dear mother's eyes, which implored me to have mercy and to
redress; and tortured by seeking assistance and power in vain."

"Seeking them from me, my nephew," said the Marquis, touching him on
the breast with his forefinger--they were now standing by the
hearth--"you will for ever seek them in vain, be assured."

Every fine straight line in the clear whiteness of his face, was
cruelly, craftily, and closely compressed, while he stood looking
quietly at his nephew, with his snuff-box in his hand.  Once again he
touched him on the breast, as though his finger were the fine point
of a small sword, with which, in delicate finesse, he ran him through
the body, and said,

"My friend, I will die, perpetuating the system under which I have lived."

When he had said it, he took a culminating pinch of snuff, and put
his box in his pocket.

"Better to be a rational creature," he added then, after ringing a
small bell on the table, "and accept your natural destiny.  But you
are lost, Monsieur Charles, I see."

"This property and France are lost to me," said the nephew, sadly;
"I renounce them."

"Are they both yours to renounce?  France may be, but is the property?
It is scarcely worth mentioning; but, is it yet?"

"I had no intention, in the words I used, to claim it yet.  If it
passed to me from you, to-morrow--"

"Which I have the vanity to hope is not probable."

"--or twenty years hence--"

"You do me too much honour," said the Marquis; "still, I prefer that
supposition."

"--I would abandon it, and live otherwise and elsewhere.  It is
little to relinquish.  What is it but a wilderness of misery and ruin!"

"Hah!" said the Marquis, glancing round the luxurious room.

"To the eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity, under
the sky, and by the daylight, it is a crumbling tower of waste,
mismanagement, extortion, debt, mortgage, oppression, hunger,
nakedness, and suffering."

"Hah!" said the Marquis again, in a well-satisfied manner.

"If it ever becomes mine, it shall be put into some hands better
qualified to free it slowly (if such a thing is possible) from the
weight that drags it down, so that the miserable people who cannot
leave it and who have been long wrung to the last point of endurance,
may, in another generation, suffer less; but it is not for me.
There is a curse on it, and on all this land."

"And you?" said the uncle.  "Forgive my curiosity; do you, under your
new philosophy, graciously intend to live?"

"I must do, to live, what others of my countrymen, even with nobility
at their backs, may have to do some day-work."

"In England, for example?"

"Yes.  The family honour, sir, is safe from me in this country.  The
family name can suffer from me in no other, for I bear it in no other."

The ringing of the bell had caused the adjoining bed-chamber to be
lighted.  It now shone brightly, through the door of communication.
The Marquis looked that way, and listened for the retreating step of
his valet.

"England is very attractive to you, seeing how indifferently you have
prospered there," he observed then, turning his calm face to his
nephew with a smile.

"I have already said, that for my prospering there, I am sensible I
may be indebted to you, sir.  For the rest, it is my Refuge."

"They say, those boastful English, that it is the Refuge of many.
You know a compatriot who has found a Refuge there?  A Doctor?"

"Yes."

"With a daughter?"

"Yes."

"Yes," said the Marquis.  "You are fatigued.  Good night!"

As he bent his head in his most courtly manner, there was a secrecy
in his smiling face, and he conveyed an air of mystery to those
words, which struck the eyes and ears of his nephew forcibly.  At the
same time, the thin straight lines of the setting of the eyes, and
the thin straight lips, and the markings in the nose, curved with a
sarcasm that looked handsomely diabolic.

"Yes," repeated the Marquis.  "A Doctor with a daughter.  Yes.
So commences the new philosophy!  You are fatigued.  Good night!"

It would have been of as much avail to interrogate any stone face
outside the chateau as to interrogate that face of his.  The nephew
looked at him, in vain, in passing on to the door.

"Good night!" said the uncle.  "I look to the pleasure of seeing you
again in the morning.  Good repose!  Light Monsieur my nephew to his
chamber there!--And burn Monsieur my nephew in his bed, if you will,"
he added to himself, before he rang his little ben again, and summoned
his valet to his own bedroom.

The valet come and gone, Monsieur the Marquis walked to and fro in
his loose chamber-robe, to prepare himself gently for sleep, that hot
still night.  Rustling about the room, his softly-slippered feet
making no noise on the floor, he moved like a refined tiger:--looked
like some enchanted marquis of the impenitently wicked sort, in story,
whose periodical change into tiger form was either just going off, or
just coming on.

He moved from end to end of his voluptuous bedroom, looking again at
the scraps of the day's journey that came unbidden into his mind; the
slow toil up the hill at sunset, the setting sun, the descent, the
mill, the prison on the crag, the little village in the hollow, the
peasants at the fountain, and the mender of roads with his blue cap
pointing out the chain under the carriage.  That fountain suggested
the Paris fountain, the little bundle lying on the step, the women
bending over it, and the tall man with his arms up, crying, "Dead!"

"I am cool now," said Monsieur the Marquis, "and may go to bed."

So, leaving only one light burning on the large hearth, he let his
thin gauze curtains fa]J around him, and heard the night break its
silence with a long sigh as he composed himself to sleep.

The stone faces on the outer wails stared blindly at the black night
for three heavy hours; for three heavy hours, the horses in the
stables rattled at their racks, the dogs barked, and the owl made a
noise with very little resemblance in it to the noise conventionally
assigned to the owl by men-poets.  But it is the obstinate custom of
such creatures hardly ever to say what is set down for them.

For three heavy hours, the stone faces of the chateau, lion and
human, stared blindly at the night.  Dead darkness lay on all the
landscape, dead darkness added its own hush to the hushing dust on
all the roads.  The burial-place had got to the pass that its little
heaps of poor grass were undistinguishable from one another; the
figure on the Cross might have come down, for anything that could be
seen of it.  In the village, taxers and taxed were fast asleep.
Dreaming, perhaps, of banquets, as the starved usually do, and of
ease and rest, as the driven slave and the yoked ox may, its lean
inhabitants slept soundly, and were fed and freed.

The fountain in the village flowed unseen and unheard, and the
fountain at the chateau dropped unseen and unheard--both melting
away, like the minutes that were falling from the spring of Time--
through three dark hours.  Then, the grey water of both began to be
ghostly in the light, and the eyes of the stone faces of the chateau
were opened.

Lighter and lighter, until at last the sun touched the tops of the
still trees, and poured its radiance over the hill.  In the glow,
the water of the chateau fountain seemed to turn to blood, and the
stone faces crimsoned.  The carol of the birds was loud and high,
and, on the weather-beaten sill of the great window of the bed-
chamber of Monsieur the Marquis, one little bird sang its sweetest
song with all its might.  At this, the nearest stone face seemed
to stare amazed, and, with open mouth and dropped under-jaw, looked
awe-stricken.

Now, the sun was full up, and movement began in the village.
Casement windows opened, crazy doors were unbarred, and people came
forth shivering--chilled, as yet, by the new sweet air.  Then began
the rarely lightened toil of the day among the village population.
Some, to the fountain; some, to the fields; men and women here, to
dig and delve; men and women there, to see to the poor live stock,
and lead the bony cows out, to such pasture as could be found by the
roadside.  In the church and at the Cross, a kneeling figure or two;
attendant on the latter prayers, the led cow, trying for a breakfast
among the weeds at its foot.

The chateau awoke later, as became its quality, but awoke gradually
and surely.  First, the lonely boar-spears and knives of the chase
had been reddened as of old; then, had gleamed trenchant in the
morning sunshine; now, doors and windows were thrown open, horses
in their stables looked round over their shoulders at the light and
freshness pouring in at doorways, leaves sparkled and rustled at
iron-grated windows, dogs pulled hard at their chains, and reared
impatient to be loosed.

All these trivial incidents belonged to the routine of life, and the
return of morning.  Surely, not so the ringing of the great bell of
the chateau, nor the running up and down the stairs; nor the hurried
figures on the terrace; nor the booting and tramping here and there
and everywhere, nor the quick saddling of horses and riding away?

What winds conveyed this hurry to the grizzled mender of roads,
already at work on the hill-top beyond the village, with his day's
dinner (not much to carry) lying in a bundle that it was worth no
crow's while to peck at, on a heap of stones?  Had the birds, carrying
some grains of it to a distance, dropped one over him as they sow
chance seeds?  Whether or no, the mender of roads ran, on the sultry
morning, as if for his life, down the hill, knee-high in dust, and
never stopped till he got to the fountain.

All the people of the village were at the fountain, standing about in
their depressed manner, and whispering low, but showing no other
emotions than grim curiosity and surprise.  The led cows, hastily
brought in and tethered to anything that would hold them, were looking
stupidly on, or lying down chewing the cud of nothing particularly
repaying their trouble, which they had picked up in their interrupted
saunter.  Some of the people of the chateau, and some of those of the
posting-house, and all the taxing authorities, were armed more or less,
and were crowded on the other side of the little street in a
purposeless way, that was highly fraught with nothing.  Already,
the mender of roads had penetrated into the midst of a group of fifty
particular friends, and was smiting himself in the breast with his
blue cap.  What did all this portend, and what portended the swift
hoisting-up of Monsieur Gabelle behind a servant on horseback, and
the conveying away of the said Gabelle (double-laden though the horse
was), at a gallop, like a new version of the German ballad of Leonora?

It portended that there was one stone face too many, up at the chateau.

The Gorgon had surveyed the building again in the night, and had
added the one stone face wanting; the stone face for which it had
waited through about two hundred years.

It lay back on the pillow of Monsieur the Marquis.  It was like a
fine mask, suddenly startled, made angry, and petrified.  Driven home
into the heart of the stone figure attached to it, was a knife.
Round its hilt was a frill of paper, on which was scrawled:

"Drive him fast to his tomb.  This, from Jacques."



X

Two Promises


More months, to the number of twelve, had come and gone, and Mr.
Charles Darnay was established in England as a higher teacher of the
French language who was conversant with French literature.  In this
age, he would have been a Professor; in that age, he was a Tutor.
He read with young men who could find any leisure and interest for
the study of a living tongue spoken all over the world, and he
cultivated a taste for its stores of knowledge and fancy.  He could
write of them, besides, in sound English, and render them into sound
English.  Such masters were not at that time easily found; Princes
that had been, and Kings that were to be, were not yet of the Teacher
class, and no ruined nobility had dropped out of Tellson's ledgers,
to turn cooks and carpenters.  As a tutor, whose attainments made the
student's way unusually pleasant and profitable, and as an elegant
translator who brought something to his work besides mere dictionary
knowledge, young Mr. Darnay soon became known and encouraged.  He was
well acquainted, more-over, with the circumstances of his country,
and those were of ever-growing interest.  So, with great perseverance
and untiring industry, he prospered.

In London, he had expected neither to walk on pavements of gold, nor
to lie on beds of roses; if he had had any such exalted expectation,
he would not have prospered.  He had expected labour, and he found it,
and did it and made the best of it.  In this, his prosperity consisted.

A certain portion of his time was passed at Cambridge, where he read
with undergraduates as a sort of tolerated smuggler who drove a
contraband trade in European languages, instead of conveying Greek
and Latin through the Custom-house.  The rest of his time he passed
in London.

Now, from the days when it was always summer in Eden, to these days
when it is mostly winter in fallen latitudes, the world of a man has
invariably gone one way--Charles Darnay's way--the way of the love of
a woman.

He had loved Lucie Manette from the hour of his danger.  He had never
heard a sound so sweet and dear as the sound of her compassionate
voice; he had never seen a face so tenderly beautiful, as hers when
it was confronted with his own on the edge of the grave that had been
dug for him.  But, he had not yet spoken to her on the subject;
the assassination at the deserted chateau far away beyond the heaving
water and the long, tong, dusty roads--the solid stone chateau which
had itself become the mere mist of a dream--had been done a year,
and he had never yet, by so much as a single spoken word, disclosed
to her the state of his heart.

That he had his reasons for this, he knew full well.  It was again a
summer day when, lately arrived in London from his college occupation,
he turned into the quiet corner in Soho, bent on seeking an opportunity
of opening his mind to Doctor Manette.  It was the close of the
summer day, and he knew Lucie to be out with Miss Pross.

He found the Doctor reading in his arm-chair at a window.  The energy
which had at once supported him under his old sufferings and aggravated
their sharpness, had been gradually restored to him.  He was now a
very energetic man indeed, with great firmness of purpose, strength
of resolution, and vigour of action.  In his recovered energy he was
sometimes a little fitful and sudden, as he had at first been in the
exercise of his other recovered faculties; but, this had never been
frequently observable, and had grown more and more rare.

He studied much, slept little, sustained a great deal of fatigue with
ease, and was equably cheerful.  To him, now entered Charles Darnay,
at sight of whom he laid aside his book and held out his hand.

"Charles Darnay!  I rejoice to see you.  We have been counting on your
return these three or four days past.  Mr. Stryver and Sydney Carton
were both here yesterday, and both made you out to be more than due."

"I am obliged to them for their interest in the matter," he answered,
a little coldly as to them, though very warmly as to the Doctor.
"Miss Manette--"

"Is well," said the Doctor, as he stopped short, "and your return
will delight us all.  She has gone out on some household matters,
but will soon be home."

"Doctor Manette, I knew she was from home.  I took the opportunity of
her being from home, to beg to speak to you."

There was a blank silence.

"Yes?" said the Doctor, with evident constraint.  "Bring your chair here,
and speak on."

He complied as to the chair, but appeared to find the speaking on
less easy.

"I have had the happiness, Doctor Manette, of being so intimate
here," so he at length began, "for some year and a half, that I hope
the topic on which I am about to touch may not--"

He was stayed by the Doctor's putting out his hand to stop him.
When he had kept it so a little while, he said, drawing it back:

"Is Lucie the topic?"

"She is."

"It is hard for me to speak of her at any time.  It is very hard for
me to hear her spoken of in that tone of yours, Charles Darnay."

"It is a tone of fervent admiration, true homage, and deep love,
Doctor Manette!" he said deferentially.

There was another blank silence before her father rejoined:

"I believe it.  I do you justice; I believe it."

His constraint was so manifest, and it was so manifest, too, that it
originated in an unwillingness to approach the subject, that Charles
Darnay hesitated.

"Shall I go on, sir?"

Another blank.

"Yes, go on."

"You anticipate what I would say, though you cannot know how earnestly
I say it, how earnestly I feel it, without knowing my secret heart,
and the hopes and fears and anxieties with which it has long been
laden.  Dear Doctor Manette, I love your daughter fondly, dearly,
disinterestedly, devotedly.  If ever there were love in the world,
I love her.  You have loved yourself; let your old love speak for me!"

The Doctor sat with his face turned away, and his eyes bent on the
ground.  At the last words, he stretched out his hand again, hurriedly,
and cried:

"Not that, sir!  Let that be!  I adjure you, do not recall that!"

His cry was so like a cry of actual pain, that it rang in Charles
Darnay's ears long after he had ceased.  He motioned with the hand he
had extended, and it seemed to be an appeal to Darnay to pause.
The latter so received it, and remained silent.

"I ask your pardon," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, after some
moments.  "I do not doubt your loving Lucie; you may be satisfied of it."

He turned towards him in his chair, but did not look at him, or raise
his eyes.  His chin dropped upon his hand, and his white hair
overshadowed his face:

"Have you spoken to Lucie?"

"No."

"Nor written?"

"Never."

"It would be ungenerous to affect not to know that your self-denial
is to be referred to your consideration for her father.  Her father
thanks you.

He offered his hand; but his eyes did not go with it.

"I know," said Darnay, respectfully, "how can I fail to know,
Doctor Manette, I who have seen you together from day to day,
that between you and Miss Manette there is an affection so unusual,
so touching, so belonging to the circumstances in which it has been
nurtured, that it can have few parallels, even in the tenderness
between a father and child.  I know, Doctor Manette--how can I fail
to know--that, mingled with the affection and duty of a daughter who
has become a woman, there is, in her heart, towards you, all the love
and reliance of infancy itself.  I know that, as in her childhood she
had no parent, so she is now devoted to you with all the constancy
and fervour of her present years and character, united to the
trustfulness and attachment of the early days in which you were lost
to her.  I know perfectly well that if you had been restored to her
from the world beyond this life, you could hardly be invested, in her
sight, with a more sacred character than that in which you are always
with her.  I know that when she is clinging to you, the hands of baby,
girl, and woman, all in one, are round your neck.  I know that in
loving you she sees and loves her mother at her own age, sees and
loves you at my age, loves her mother broken-hearted, loves you
through your dreadful trial and in your blessed restoration.  I have
known this, night and day, since I have known you in your home."

Her father sat silent, with his face bent down.  His breathing was a
little quickened; but he repressed all other signs of agitation.

"Dear Doctor Manette, always knowing this, always seeing her and you
with this hallowed light about you, I have forborne, and forborne,
as long as it was in the nature of man to do it.  I have felt, and do
even now feel, that to bring my love--even mine--between you, is to
touch your history with something not quite so good as itself.
But I love her.  Heaven is my witness that I love her!"

"I believe it," answered her father, mournfully.  "I have thought so
before now.  I believe it."

"But, do not believe," said Darnay, upon whose ear the mournful voice
struck with a reproachful sound, "that if my fortune were so cast as
that, being one day so happy as to make her my wife, I must at any
time put any separation between her and you, I could or would breathe
a word of what I now say.  Besides that I should know it to be
hopeless, I should know it to be a baseness.  If I had any such
possibility, even at a remote distance of years, harboured in my
thoughts, and hidden in my heart--if it ever had been there--if it
ever could be there--I could not now touch this honoured hand."

He laid his own upon it as he spoke.

"No, dear Doctor Manette.  Like you, a voluntary exile from France;
like you, driven from it by its distractions, oppressions, and
miseries; like you, striving to live away from it by my own exertions,
and trusting in a happier future; I look only to sharing your fortunes,
sharing your life and home, and being faithful to you to the death.
Not to divide with Lucie her privilege as your child, companion, and
friend; but to come in aid of it, and bind her closer to you, if such
a thing can be."

His touch still lingered on her father's hand.  Answering the touch
for a moment, but not coldly, her father rested his hands upon the
arms of his chair, and looked up for the first time since the
beginning of the conference.  A struggle was evidently in his face;
a struggle with that occasional look which had a tendency in it to
dark doubt and dread.

"You speak so feelingly and so manfully, Charles Darnay, that I thank
you with all my heart, and will open all my heart--or nearly so.
Have you any reason to believe that Lucie loves you?"

"None.  As yet, none."

"Is it the immediate object of this confidence, that you may at once
ascertain that, with my knowledge?"

"Not even so.  I might not have the hopefulness to do it for weeks;
I might (mistaken or not mistaken) have that hopefulness to-morrow."

"Do you seek any guidance from me?"

"I ask none, sir.  But I have thought it possible that you might have
it in your power, if you should deem it right, to give me some."

"Do you seek any promise from me?"

"I do seek that."

"What is it?"

"I well understand that, without you, I could have no hope.  I well
understand that, even if Miss Manette held me at this moment in her
innocent heart-do not think I have the presumption to assume so much--
I could retain no place in it against her love for her father."

"If that be so, do you see what, on the other hand, is involved in it?"

"I understand equally well, that a word from her father in any suitor's
favour, would outweigh herself and all the world.  For which reason,
Doctor Manette," said Darnay, modestly but firmly, "I would not ask
that word, to save my life."

"I am sure of it.  Charles Darnay, mysteries arise out of close love,
as well as out of wide division; in the former case, they are subtle
and delicate, and difficult to penetrate.  My daughter Lucie is, in
this one respect, such a mystery to me; I can make no guess at the
state of her heart."

"May I ask, sir, if you think she is--" As he hesitated, her father
supplied the rest.

"Is sought by any other suitor?"

"It is what I meant to say."

Her father considered a little before he answered:

"You have seen Mr. Carton here, yourself.  Mr. Stryver is here too,
occasionally.  If it be at all, it can only be by one of these."

"Or both," said Darnay.

"I had not thought of both; I should not think either, likely.
You want a promise from me.  Tell me what it is."

"It is, that if Miss Manette should bring to you at any time, on her
own part, such a confidence as I have ventured to lay before you,
you will bear testimony to what I have said, and to your belief in it.
I hope you may be able to think so well of me, as to urge no influence
against me. I say nothing more of my stake in this; this is what I ask.
The condition on which I ask it, and which you have an undoubted right
to require, I will observe immediately."

"I give the promise," said the Doctor, "without any condition.
I believe your object to be, purely and truthfully, as you have
stated it.  I believe your intention is to perpetuate, and not to
weaken, the ties between me and my other and far dearer self.  If she
should ever tell me that you are essential to her perfect happiness,
I will give her to you.  If there were--Charles Darnay, if there were--"

The young man had taken his hand gratefully; their hands were joined
as the Doctor spoke:

"--any fancies, any reasons, any apprehensions, anything whatsoever,
new or old, against the man she really loved--the direct responsibility
thereof not lying on his head--they should all be obliterated for her
sake.  She is everything to me; more to me than suffering, more to me
than wrong, more to me--Well!  This is idle talk."

So strange was the way in which he faded into silence, and so strange
his fixed look when he had ceased to speak, that Darnay felt his own
hand turn cold in the hand that slowly released and dropped it.

"You said something to me," said Doctor Manette, breaking into a smile.
"What was it you said to me?"

He was at a loss how to answer, until he remembered having spoken of
a condition.  Relieved as his mind reverted to that, he answered:

"Your confidence in me ought to be returned with full confidence on
my part.  My present name, though but slightly changed from my
mother's, is not, as you will remember, my own.  I wish to tell you
what that is, and why I am in England."

"Stop!" said the Doctor of Beauvais.

"I wish it, that I may the better deserve your confidence, and have
no secret from you."

"Stop!"

For an instant, the Doctor even had his two hands at his ears; for
another instant, even had his two hands laid on Darnay's lips.

"Tell me when I ask you, not now.  If your suit should prosper, if
Lucie should love you, you shall tell me on your marriage morning.
Do you promise?"

"Willingly.

"Give me your hand.  She will be home directly, and it is better she
should not see us together to-night.  Go!  God bless you!"

It was dark when Charles Darnay left him, and it was an hour later
and darker when Lucie came home; she hurried into the room alone--
for Miss Pross had gone straight up-stairs--and was surprised to find
his reading-chair empty.

"My father!" she called to him.  "Father dear!"

Nothing was said in answer, but she heard a low hammering sound in
his bedroom.  Passing lightly across the intermediate room, she
looked in at his door and came running back frightened, crying to
herself, with her blood all chilled, "What shall I do!  What shall I do!"

Her uncertainty lasted but a moment; she hurried back, and tapped at
his door, and softly called to him.  The noise ceased at the sound of
her voice, and he presently came out to her, and they walked up and
down together for a long time.

She came down from her bed, to look at him in his sleep that night.
He slept heavily, and his tray of shoemaking tools, and his old
unfinished work, were all as usual.



XI

A Companion Picture


"Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, on that self-same night, or morning, to his
jackal; "mix another bowl of punch; I have something to say to you."

Sydney had been working double tides that night, and the night before,
and the night before that, and a good many nights in succession, making
a grand clearance among Mr. Stryver's papers before the setting in of
the long vacation.  The clearance was effected at last; the Stryver
arrears were handsomely fetched up; everything was got rid of until
November should come with its fogs atmospheric, and fogs legal, and
bring grist to the mill again.

Sydney was none the livelier and none the soberer for so much application.
It had taken a deal of extra wet-towelling to pull him through the night;
a correspondingly extra quantity of wine had preceded the towelling;
and he was in a very damaged condition, as he now pulled his turban
off and threw it into the basin in which he had steeped it at intervals
for the last six hours.

"Are you mixing that other bowl of punch?" said Stryver the portly,
with his hands in his waistband, glancing round from the sofa where
he lay on his back.

"I am."

"Now, look here!  I am going to tell you something that will rather
surprise you, and that perhaps will make you think me not quite as
shrewd as you usually do think me.  I intend to marry."

"DO you?"

"Yes.  And not for money.  What do you say now?"

"I don't feel disposed to say much.  Who is she?"

"Guess."

"Do I know her?"

"Guess."

"I am not going to guess, at five o'clock in the morning, with my
brains frying and sputtering in my head. if you want me to guess, you
must ask me to dinner."

"Well then, I'll tell you, said Stryver, coming slowly into a sitting
posture.  "Sydney, I rather despair of making myself intelligible to you,
because you are such an insensible dog.

"And you," returned Sydney, busy concocting the punch, "are such a
sensitive and poetical spirit--"

"Come!" rejoined Stryver, laughing boastfully, "though I don't prefer
any claim to being the soul of Romance (for I hope I know better),
still I am a tenderer sort of fellow than YOU."

"You are a luckier, if you mean that."

"I don't mean that.  I mean I am a man of more--more--"

"Say gallantry, while you are about it," suggested Carton.

"Well!  I'll say gallantry.  My meaning is that I am a man," said
Stryver, inflating himself at his friend as he made the punch,
"who cares more to be agreeable, who takes more pains to be agreeable,
who knows better how to be agreeable, in a woman's society, than you do."

"Go on," said Sydney Carton.

"No; but before I go on," said Stryver, shaking his head in his bullying
way, I'll have this out with you.  You've been at Doctor Manette's
house as much as I have, or more than I have.  Why, I have been ashamed
of your moroseness there!  Your manners have been of that silent and
sullen and hangdog kind, that, upon my life and soul, I have been
ashamed of you, Sydney!"

"It should be very beneficial to a man in your practice at the bar,
to be ashamed of anything," returned Sydney; "you ought to be much
obliged to me."

"You shall not get off in that way," rejoined Stryver, shouldering the
rejoinder at him; "no, Sydney, it's my duty to tell you--and I tell you
to your face to do you good--that you are a devilish ill-conditioned
fellow in that sort of society.  You are a disagreeable fellow."

Sydney drank a bumper of the punch he had made, and laughed.

"Look at me!" said Stryver, squaring himself; "I have less need to
make myself agreeable than you have, being more independent in
circumstances.  Why do I do it?"

"I never saw you do it yet," muttered Carton.

"I do it because it's politic; I do it on principle.  And look at me!
I get on."

"You don't get on with your account of your matrimonial intentions,"
answered Carton, with a careless air; "I wish you would keep to that.
As to me--will you never understand that I am incorrigible?"

He asked the question with some appearance of scorn.

"You have no business to be incorrigible," was his friend's answer,
delivered in no very soothing tone.

"I have no business to be, at all, that I know of," said Sydney Carton.
"Who is the lady?"

"Now, don't let my announcement of the name make you uncomfortable,
Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, preparing him with ostentatious
friendliness for the disclosure he was about to make, "because I know
you don't mean half you say; and if you meant it all, it would be of
no importance.  I make this little preface, because you once mentioned
the young lady to me in slighting terms."

"I did?"

"Certainly; and in these chambers."

Sydney Carton looked at his punch and looked at his complacent friend;
drank his punch and looked at his complacent friend.

"You made mention of the young lady as a golden-haired doll.  The young
lady is Miss Manette.  If you had been a fellow of any sensitiveness or
delicacy of feeling in that kind of way, Sydney, I might have been a
little resentful of your employing such a designation; but you are not.
You want that sense altogether; therefore I am no more annoyed when I
think of the expression, than I should be annoyed by a man's opinion of
a picture of mine, who had no eye for pictures:  or of a piece of music
of mine, who had no ear for music."

Sydney Carton drank the punch at a great rate; drank it by bumpers,
looking at his friend.

"Now you know all about it, Syd," said Mr. Stryver.  "I don't care
about fortune:  she is a charming creature, and I have made up my mind
to please myself:  on the whole, I think I can afford to please myself.
She will have in me a man already pretty well off, and a rapidly
rising man, and a man of some distinction:  it is a piece of good fortune
for her, but she is worthy of good fortune.  Are you astonished?"

Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I be astonished?"

"You approve?"

Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I not approve?"

"Well!" said his friend Stryver, "you take it more easily than I
fancied you would, and are less mercenary on my behalf than I thought
you would be; though, to be sure, you know well enough by this time
that your ancient chum is a man of a pretty strong will.  Yes, Sydney,
I have had enough of this style of life, with no other as a change
from it; I feel that it is a pleasant thing for a man to have a home
when he feels inclined to go to it (when he doesn't, he can stay away),
and I feel that Miss Manette will tell well in any station, and will
always do me credit.  So I have made up my mind.  And now, Sydney,
old boy, I want to say a word to YOU about YOUR prospects.  You are
in a bad way, you know; you really are in a bad way.  You don't know
the value of money, you Eve hard, you'll knock up one of these days,
and be ill and poor; you really ought to think about a nurse."

The prosperous patronage with which he said it, made him look twice
as big as he was, and four times as offensive.

"Now, let me recommend you," pursued Stryver, "to look it in the face.
I have looked it in the face, in my different way; look it in the face,
you, in your different way.  Marry.  Provide somebody to take care of you.
Never mind your having no enjoyment of women's society, nor understanding
of it, nor tact for it.  Find out somebody.  Find out some respectable
woman with a little property--somebody in the landlady way, or
lodging-letting way--and marry her, against a rainy day.  That's the
kind of thing for YOU.  Now think of it, Sydney."

"I'll think of it," said Sydney.



XII

The Fellow of Delicacy


Mr. Stryver having made up his mind to that magnanimous bestowal of
good fortune on the Doctor's daughter, resolved to make her happiness
known to her before he left town for the Long Vacation.  After some
mental debating of the point, he came to the conclusion that it would
be as well to get all the preliminaries done with, and they could
then arrange at their leisure whether he should give her his hand a
week or two before Michaelmas Term, or in the little Christmas vacation
between it and Hilary.

As to the strength of his case, he had not a doubt about it, but
clearly saw his way to the verdict.  Argued with the jury on substantial
worldly grounds--the only grounds ever worth taking into account--
it was a plain case, and had not a weak spot in it.  He called himself
for the plaintiff, there was no getting over his evidence, the counsel
for the defendant threw up his brief, and the jury did not even turn
to consider.  After trying it, Stryver, C. J., was satisfied that no
plainer case could be.

Accordingly, Mr. Stryver inaugurated the Long Vacation with a
formal proposal to take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens; that failing,
to Ranelagh; that unaccountably failing too, it behoved him to present
himself in Soho, and there declare his noble mind.

Towards Soho, therefore, Mr. Stryver shouldered his way from the
Temple, while the bloom of the Long Vacation's infancy was still upon
it.  Anybody who had seen him projecting himself into Soho while he
was yet on Saint Dunstan's side of Temple Bar, bursting in his
full-blown way along the pavement, to the jostlement of all weaker
people, might have seen how safe and strong he was.

His way taking him past Tellson's, and he both banking at Tellson's
and knowing Mr. Lorry as the intimate friend of the Manettes, it
entered Mr. Stryver's mind to enter the bank, and reveal to Mr. Lorry
the brightness of the Soho horizon.  So, he pushed open the door with
the weak rattle in its throat, stumbled down the two steps, got past
the two ancient cashiers, and shouldered himself into the musty back
closet where Mr. Lorry sat at great books ruled for figures, with
perpendicular iron bars to his window as if that were ruled for
figures too, and everything under the clouds were a sum.

"Halloa!" said Mr. Stryver.  "How do you do?  I hope you are well!"

It was Stryver's grand peculiarity that he always seemed too big for
any place, or space.  He was so much too big for Tellson's, that
old clerks in distant corners looked up with looks of remonstrance,
as though he squeezed them against the wall.  The House itself,
magnificently reading the paper quite in the far-off perspective,
lowered displeased, as if the Stryver head had been butted into its
responsible waistcoat.

The discreet Mr. Lorry said, in a sample tone of the voice he would
recommend under the circumstances, "How do you do, Mr. Stryver?
How do you do, sir?" and shook hands.  There was a peculiarity in his
manner of shaking hands, always to be seen in any clerk at Tellson's
who shook hands with a customer when the House pervaded the air.
He shook in a self-abnegating way, as one who shook for Tellson and Co.

"Can I do anything for you, Mr. Stryver?" asked Mr. Lorry, in his
business character.

"Why, no, thank you; this is a private visit to yourself, Mr. Lorry;
I have come for a private word."

"Oh indeed!" said Mr. Lorry, bending down his ear, while his eye
strayed to the House afar off.

"I am going," said Mr. Stryver, leaning his arms confidentially on the
desk:  whereupon, although it was a large double one, there appeared to
be not half desk enough for him:  "I am going to make an offer of myself
in marriage to your agreeable little friend, Miss Manette, Mr. Lorry."

"Oh dear me!" cried Mr. Lorry, rubbing his chin, and looking at his
visitor dubiously.

"Oh dear me, sir?" repeated Stryver, drawing back.  "Oh dear you, sir?
What may your meaning be, Mr. Lorry?"

"My meaning," answered the man of business, "is, of course, friendly
and appreciative, and that it does you the greatest credit, and--
in short, my meaning is everything you could desire.  But--really, you
know, Mr. Stryver--" Mr. Lorry paused, and shook his head at him in
the oddest manner, as if he were compelled against his will to add,
internally, "you know there really is so much too much of you!"

"Well!" said Stryver, slapping the desk with his contentious hand,
opening his eyes wider, and taking a long breath, "if I understand
you, Mr. Lorry, I'll be hanged!"

Mr. Lorry adjusted his little wig at both ears as a means towards
that end, and bit the feather of a pen.

"D--n it all, sir!" said Stryver, staring at him, "am I not eligible?"

"Oh dear yes!  Yes.  Oh yes, you're eligible!" said Mr. Lorry.  "If you
say eligible, you are eligible."

"Am I not prosperous?" asked Stryver.

"Oh! if you come to prosperous, you are prosperous," said  Mr. Lorry.

"And advancing?"

"If you come to advancing you know," said Mr. Lorry, delighted to be
able to make another admission, "nobody can doubt that."

"Then what on earth is your meaning, Mr. Lorry?" demanded Stryver,
perceptibly crestfallen.

"Well!  I--Were you going there now?" asked Mr. Lorry.

"Straight!" said Stryver, with a plump of his fist on the desk.

"Then I think I wouldn't, if I was you."

"Why?" said Stryver.  "Now, I'll put you in a corner," forensically
shaking a forefinger at him.  "You are a man of business and bound
to have a reason.  State your reason.  Why wouldn't you go?"

"Because," said Mr. Lorry, "I wouldn't go on such an object without
having some cause to believe that I should succeed."

"D--n ME!" cried Stryver, "but this beats everything."

Mr. Lorry glanced at the distant House, and glanced at the angry Stryver.

"Here's a man of business--a man of years--a man of experience--
IN a Bank," said Stryver; "and having summed up three leading reasons
for complete success, he says there's no reason at all!  Says it with
his head on!"  Mr. Stryver remarked upon the peculiarity as if it would
have been infinitely less remarkable if he had said it with his head off.

"When I speak of success, I speak of success with the young lady; and
when I speak of causes and reasons to make success probable, I speak
of causes and reasons that will tell as such with the young lady.
The young lady, my good sir," said Mr. Lorry, mildly tapping the
Stryver arm, "the young lady.  The young lady goes before all."

"Then you mean to tell me, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver, squaring his
elbows, "that it is your deliberate opinion that the young lady at
present in question is a mincing Fool?"

"Not exactly so.  I mean to tell you, Mr. Stryver," said Mr. Lorry,
reddening, "that I will hear no disrespectful word of that young lady
from any lips; and that if I knew any man--which I hope I do not--
whose taste was so coarse, and whose temper was so overbearing,
that he could not restrain himself from speaking disrespectfully of
that young lady at this desk, not even Tellson's should prevent my
giving him a piece of my mind."

The necessity of being angry in a suppressed tone had put Mr. Stryver's
blood-vessels into a dangerous state when it was his turn to be angry;
Mr. Lorry's veins, methodical as their courses could usually be,
were in no better state now it was his turn.

"That is what I mean to tell you, sir," said Mr. Lorry.
"Pray let there be no mistake about it."

Mr. Stryver sucked the end of a ruler for a little while, and then
stood hitting a tune out of his teeth with it, which probably gave
him the toothache.  He broke the awkward silence by saying:

"This is something new to me, Mr. Lorry.  You deliberately advise
me not to go up to Soho and offer myself--MYself, Stryver of
the King's Bench bar?"

"Do you ask me for my advice, Mr. Stryver?"

"Yes, I do."

"Very good.  Then I give it, and you have repeated it correctly."

"And all I can say of it is," laughed Stryver with a vexed laugh,
"that this--ha, ha!--beats everything past, present, and to come."

"Now understand me," pursued Mr. Lorry.  "As a man of business, I
am not justified in saying anything about this matter, for, as a man
of business, I know nothing of it.  But, as an old fellow, who has
carried Miss Manette in his arms, who is the trusted friend of
Miss Manette and of her father too, and who has a great affection for
them both, I have spoken.  The confidence is not of my seeking,
recollect.  Now, you think I may not be right?"

"Not I!" said Stryver, whistling.  "I can't undertake to find third
parties in common sense; I can only find it for myself.  I suppose
sense in certain quarters; you suppose mincing bread-and-butter
nonsense.  It's new to me, but you are right, I dare say."

"What I suppose, Mr. Stryver, I claim to characterise for myself--And
understand me, sir," said Mr. Lorry, quickly flushing again,
"I will not--not even at Tellson's--have it characterised for me by any
gentleman breathing."

"There!  I beg your pardon!" said Stryver.

"Granted.  Thank you.  Well, Mr. Stryver, I was about to say:--it
might be painful to you to find yourself mistaken, it might be painful
to Doctor Manette to have the task of being explicit with you, it
might be very painful to Miss Manette to have the task of being
explicit with you.  You know the terms upon which I have the honour
and happiness to stand with the family.  If you please, committing you
in no way, representing you in no way, I will undertake to correct my
advice by the exercise of a little new observation and judgment expressly
brought to bear upon it.  If you should then be dissatisfied with it,
you can but test its soundness for yourself; if, on the other hand,
you should be satisfied with it, and it should be what it now is,
it may spare all sides what is best spared.  What do you say?"

"How long would you keep me in town?"

"Oh!  It is only a question of a few hours.  I could go to Soho in the
evening, and come to your chambers afterwards."

"Then I say yes," said Stryver:  "I won't go up there now, I am not
so hot upon it as that comes to; I say yes, and I shall expect you
to look in to-night.  Good morning."

Then Mr. Stryver turned and burst out of the Bank, causing such a
concussion of air on his passage through, that to stand up against it
bowing behind the two counters, required the utmost remaining strength
of the two ancient clerks.  Those venerable and feeble persons were
always seen by the public in the act of bowing, and were popularly
believed, when they had bowed a customer out, still to keep on bowing
in the empty office until they bowed another customer in.

The barrister was keen enough to divine that the banker would not
have gone so far in his expression of opinion on any less solid
ground than moral certainty.  Unprepared as he was for the large pill
he had to swallow, he got it down.  "And now," said Mr. Stryver,
shaking his forensic forefinger at the Temple in general, when it
was down, "my way out of this, is, to put you all in the wrong."

It was a bit of the art of an Old Bailey tactician, in which he
found great relief.  "You shall not put me in the wrong, young lady,"
said Mr. Stryver; "I'll do that for you."

Accordingly, when Mr. Lorry called that night as late as ten o'clock,
Mr. Stryver, among a quantity of books and papers littered out for
the purpose, seemed to have nothing less on his mind than the subject
of the morning.  He even showed surprise when he saw Mr. Lorry, and
was altogether in an absent and preoccupied state.

"Well!" said that good-natured emissary, after a full half-hour of
bootless attempts to bring him round to the question.  "I have
been to Soho."

"To Soho?" repeated Mr. Stryver, coldly.  "Oh, to be sure!
What am I thinking of!"

"And I have no doubt," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was right in the
conversation we had.  My opinion is confirmed, and I reiterate my advice."

"I assure you," returned Mr. Stryver, in the friendliest way, "that I
am sorry for it on your account, and sorry for it on the poor father's
account.  I know this must always be a sore subject with the family;
let us say no more about it."

"I don't understand you," said Mr. Lorry.

"I dare say not," rejoined Stryver, nodding his head in a smoothing
and final way; "no matter, no matter."

"But it does matter," Mr. Lorry urged.

"No it doesn't; I assure you it doesn't.  Having supposed that there
was sense where there is no sense, and a laudable ambition where there
is not a laudable ambition, I am well out of my mistake, and no harm
is done.  Young women have committed similar follies often before,
and have repented them in poverty and obscurity often before.  In an
unselfish aspect, I am sorry that the thing is dropped, because it
would have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view;
in a selfish aspect, I am glad that the thing has dropped, because it
would have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view--
it is hardly necessary to say I could have gained nothing by it.
There is no harm at all done.  I have not proposed to the young lady,
and, between ourselves, I am by no means certain, on reflection,
that I ever should have committed myself to that extent.  Mr. Lorry,
you cannot control the mincing vanities and giddinesses of
empty-headed girls; you must not expect to do it, or you will always
be disappointed.  Now, pray say no more about it.  I tell you,
I regret it on account of others, but I am satisfied on my own account.
And I am really very much obliged to you for allowing me to sound you,
and for giving me your advice; you know the young lady better
than I do; you were right, it never would have done."

Mr. Lorry was so taken aback, that he looked quite stupidly at
Mr. Stryver shouldering him towards the door, with an appearance of
showering generosity, forbearance, and goodwill, on his erring head.
"Make the best of it, my dear sir," said Stryver; "say no more
about it; thank you again for allowing me to sound you; good night!"

Mr. Lorry was out in the night, before he knew where he was.
Mr. Stryver was lying back on his sofa, winking at his ceiling.



XIII

The Fellow of No Delicacy


If Sydney Carton ever shone anywhere, he certainly never shone in the
house of Doctor Manette.  He had been there often, during a whole year,
and had always been the same moody and morose lounger there.  When he
cared to talk, he talked well; but, the cloud of caring for nothing,
which overshadowed him with such a fatal darkness, was very rarely
pierced by the light within him.

And yet he did care something for the streets that environed that house,
and for the senseless stones that made their pavements.  Many a night
he vaguely and unhappily wandered there, when wine had brought
no transitory gladness to him; many a dreary daybreak revealed his
solitary figure lingering there, and still lingering there when the first
beams of the sun brought into strong relief, removed beauties of
architecture in spires of churches and lofty buildings, as perhaps
the quiet time brought some sense of better things, else forgotten
and unattainable, into his mind.  Of late, the neglected bed in the
Temple Court had known him more scantily than ever; and often when he
had thrown himself upon it no longer than a few minutes, he had got up
again, and haunted that neighbourhood.

On a day in August, when Mr. Stryver (after notifying to his jackal
that "he had thought better of that marrying matter") had carried his
delicacy into Devonshire, and when the sight and scent of flowers in
the City streets had some waifs of goodness in them for the worst,
of health for the sickliest, and of youth for the oldest, Sydney's feet
still trod those stones.  From being irresolute and purposeless,
his feet became animated by an intention, and, in the working out of
that intention, they took him to the Doctor's door.

He was shown up-stairs, and found Lucie at her work, alone.  She had
never been quite at her ease with him, and received him with some
little  embarrassment as he seated himself near her table.  But,
looking up at his face in the interchange of the first few
common-places, she observed a change in it.

"I fear you are not well, Mr. Carton!"

"No.  But the life I lead, Miss Manette, is not conducive to health.
What is to be expected of, or by, such profligates?"

"Is it not--forgive me; I have begun the question on my lips--a pity
to live no better life?"

"God knows it is a shame!"

"Then why not change it?"

Looking gently at him again, she was surprised and saddened to see
that there were tears in his eyes.  There were tears in his voice too,
as he answered:

"It is too late for that.  I shall never be better than I am.
I shall sink lower, and be worse."

He leaned an elbow on her table, and covered his eyes with his hand.
The table trembled in the silence that followed.

She had never seen him softened, and was much distressed.  He knew
her to be so, without looking at her, and said:

"Pray forgive me, Miss Manette.  I break down before the knowledge
of what I want to say to you.  Will you hear me?"

"If it will do you any good, Mr. Carton, if it would make you happier,
it would make me very glad!"

"God bless you for your sweet compassion!"

He unshaded his face after a little while, and spoke steadily.

"Don't be afraid to hear me.  Don't shrink from anything I say.
I am like one who died young.  All my life might have been."

"No, Mr. Carton.  I am sure that the best part of it might still be;
I am sure that you might be much, much worthier of yourself."

"Say of you, Miss Manette, and although I know better--although
in the mystery of my own wretched heart I know better--I shall
never forget it!"

She was pale and trembling.  He came to her relief with a fixed
despair of himself which made the interview unlike any other
that could have been holden.

"If it had been possible, Miss Manette, that you could have returned
the love of the man you see before yourself--flung away, wasted,
drunken, poor creature of misuse as you know him to be--he would have
been conscious this day and hour, in spite of his happiness, that he
would bring you to misery, bring you to sorrow and repentance, blight
you, disgrace you, pull you down with him.  I know very well that you
can have no tenderness for me; I ask for none; I am even thankful
that it cannot be."

"Without it, can I not save you, Mr. Carton?  Can I not recall you--
forgive me again!--to a better course?  Can I in no way repay your
confidence?  I know this is a confidence," she modestly said, after a
little hesitation, and in earnest tears, "I know you would say this to
no one else.  Can I turn it to no good account for yourself, Mr. Carton?"

He shook his head.

"To none.  No, Miss Manette, to none.  If you will hear me through a
very little more, all you can ever do for me is done.  I wish you to
know that you have been the last dream of my soul.  In my degradation
I have not been so degraded but that the sight of you with your father,
and of this home made such a home by you, has stirred old shadows that
I thought had died out of me.  Since I knew you, I have been troubled
by a remorse that I thought would never reproach me again, and have
heard whispers from old voices impelling me upward, that I thought were
silent for ever.  I have had unformed ideas of striving afresh, beginning
anew, shaking off sloth and sensuality, and fighting out the abandoned
fight.  A dream, all a dream, that ends in nothing, and leaves the
sleeper where he lay down, but I wish you to know that you inspired it."

"Will nothing of it remain?  O Mr. Carton, think again!  Try again!"

"No, Miss Manette; all through it, I have known myself to be quite
undeserving.  And yet I have had the weakness, and have still the
weakness, to wish you to know with what a sudden mastery you kindled me,
heap of ashes that I am, into fire--a fire, however, inseparable
in its nature from myself, quickening nothing, lighting nothing,
doing no service, idly burning away."

"Since it is my misfortune, Mr. Carton, to have made you more unhappy
than you were before you knew me--"

"Don't say that, Miss Manette, for you would have reclaimed me,
if anything could. you will not be the cause of my becoming worse."

"Since the state of your mind that you describe, is, at all events,
attributable to some influence of mine--this is what I mean,
if I can make it plain--can I use no influence to serve you?
Have I no power for good, with you, at all?"

"The utmost good that I am capable of now, Miss Manette, I have come
here to realise.  Let me carry through the rest of my misdirected life,
the remembrance that I opened my heart to you, last of all the world;
and that there was something left in me at this time which you could
deplore and pity."

"Which I entreated you to believe, again and again, most fervently,
with all my heart, was capable of better things, Mr. Carton!"

"Entreat me to believe it no more, Miss Manette.  I have proved myself,
and I know better.  I distress you; I draw fast to an end.  Will you let
me believe, when I recall this day, that the last confidence of my life
was reposed in your pure and innocent breast, and that it lies there
alone, and will be shared by no one?"

"If that will be a consolation to you, yes."

"Not even by the dearest one ever to be known to you?"

"Mr. Carton," she answered, after an agitated pause, "the secret is
yours, not mine; and I promise to respect it."

"Thank you.  And again, God bless you."

He put her hand to his lips, and moved towards the door.

"Be under no apprehension, Miss Manette, of my ever resuming this
conversation by so much as a passing word.  I will never refer to it
again.  If I were dead, that could not be surer than it is henceforth.
In the hour of my death, I shall hold sacred the one good remembrance--
and shall thank and bless you for it--that my last avowal of myself was
made to you, and that my name, and faults, and miseries were gently
carried in your heart.  May it otherwise be light and happy!"

He was so unlike what he had ever shown himself to be, and it was
so sad to think how much he had thrown away, and how much he every
day kept down and perverted, that Lucie Manette wept mournfully for
him as he stood looking back at her.

"Be comforted!" he said, "I am not worth such feeling, Miss Manette.
An hour or two hence, and the low companions and low habits that I scorn
but yield to, will render me less worth such tears as those, than any
wretch who creeps along the streets.  Be comforted!  But, within myself,
I shall always be, towards you, what I am now, though outwardly I shall
be what you have heretofore seen me.  The last supplication but one
I make to you, is, that you will believe this of me."

"I will, Mr. Carton."

"My last supplication of all, is this; and with it, I will relieve
you of a visitor with whom I well know you have nothing in unison,
and between whom and you there is an impassable space.  It is useless
to say it, I know, but it rises out of my soul.  For you, and for any
dear to you, I would do anything.  If my career were of that better
kind that there was any opportunity or capacity of sacrifice in it,
I would embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear to you.
Try to hold me in your mind, at some quiet times, as ardent and sincere
in this one thing.  The time will come, the time will not be long
in coming, when new ties will be formed about you--ties that will bind
you yet more tenderly and strongly to the home you so adorn--the dearest
ties that will ever grace and gladden you.  O Miss Manette, when the
little picture of a happy father's face looks up in yours, when you
see your own bright beauty springing up anew at your feet, think
now and then that there is a man who would give his life, to keep
a life you love beside you!"

He said, "Farewell!" said a last "God bless you!" and left her.



XIV

The Honest Tradesman


To the eyes of Mr. Jeremiah Cruncher, sitting on his stool in
Fleet-street with his grisly urchin beside him, a vast number and
variety of objects in movement were every day presented.  Who could
sit upon anything in Fleet-street during the busy hours of the day,
and not be dazed and deafened by two immense processions, one ever
tending westward with the sun, the other ever tending eastward
from the sun, both ever tending to the plains beyond the range of red
and purple where the sun goes down!

With his straw in his mouth, Mr. Cruncher sat watching the two streams,
like the heathen rustic who has for several centuries been on duty
watching one stream--saving that Jerry had no expectation of their
ever running dry.  Nor would it have been an expectation of a hopeful
kind, since a small part of his income was derived from the pilotage
of timid women (mostly of a full habit and past the middle term of life)
from Tellson's side of the tides to the opposite shore.  Brief as such
companionship was in every separate instance, Mr. Cruncher never
failed to become so interested in the lady as to express a strong desire
to have the honour of drinking her very good health.  And it was from
the gifts bestowed upon him towards the execution of this benevolent
purpose, that he recruited his finances, as just now observed.

Time was, when a poet sat upon a stool in a public place, and mused
in the sight of men.  Mr. Cruncher, sitting on a stool in a public place,
but not being a poet, mused as little as possible, and looked about him.

It fell out that he was thus engaged in a season when crowds were few,
and belated women few, and when his affairs in general were so
unprosperous as to awaken a strong suspicion in his breast that
Mrs. Cruncher must have been "flopping" in some pointed manner, when
an unusual concourse pouring down Fleet-street westward, attracted his
attention.  Looking that way, Mr. Cruncher made out that some kind of
funeral was coming along, and that there was popular objection to this
funeral, which engendered uproar.

"Young Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, turning to his offspring,
"it's a buryin'."

"Hooroar, father!" cried Young Jerry.

The young gentleman uttered this exultant sound with mysterious
significance.  The elder gentleman took the cry so ill, that he
watched his opportunity, and smote the young gentleman on the ear.

"What d'ye mean?  What are you hooroaring at?  What do you want to
conwey to your own father, you young Rip?  This boy is a getting
too many for ME!" said Mr. Cruncher, surveying him.  "Him and
his hooroars!  Don't let me hear no more of you, or you shall feel
some more of me.  D'ye hear?"

"I warn't doing no harm," Young Jerry protested, rubbing his cheek.

"Drop it then," said Mr. Cruncher; "I won't have none of YOUR
no harms.  Get a top of that there seat, and look at the crowd."

His son obeyed, and the crowd approached; they were bawling and hissing
round a dingy hearse and dingy mourning coach, in which mourning coach
there was only one mourner, dressed in the dingy trappings that were
considered essential to the dignity of the position.  The position
appeared by no means to please him, however, with an increasing rabble
surrounding the coach, deriding him, making grimaces at him,
and incessantly groaning and calling out:  "Yah!  Spies!  Tst!  Yaha!
Spies!" with many compliments too numerous and forcible to repeat.

Funerals had at all times a remarkable attraction for Mr. Cruncher;
he always pricked up his senses, and became excited, when a funeral
passed Tellson's.  Naturally, therefore, a funeral with this uncommon
attendance excited him greatly, and he asked of the first man who ran
against him:

"What is it, brother?  What's it about?"

"_I_ don't know," said the man.  "Spies!  Yaha!  Tst!  Spies!"

He asked another man.  "Who is it?"

"_I_ don't know," returned the man, clapping his hands to his mouth
nevertheless, and vociferating in a surprising heat and with the
greatest ardour, "Spies!  Yaha!  Tst, tst!  Spi--ies!"

At length, a person better informed on the merits of the case,
tumbled against him, and from this person he learned that the funeral
was the funeral of one Roger Cly.

"Was He a spy?" asked Mr. Cruncher.

"Old Bailey spy," returned his informant.  "Yaha!  Tst!  Yah!
Old Bailey Spi--i--ies!"

"Why, to be sure!" exclaimed Jerry, recalling the Trial at which he
had assisted.  "I've seen him.  Dead, is he?"

"Dead as mutton," returned the other, "and can't be too dead.
Have 'em out, there!  Spies!  Pull 'em out, there!  Spies!"

The idea was so acceptable in the prevalent absence of any idea,
that the crowd caught it up with eagerness, and loudly repeating the
suggestion to have 'em out, and to pull 'em out, mobbed the two vehicles
so closely that they came to a stop.  On the crowd's opening the coach
doors, the one mourner scuffled out of himself and was in their hands
for a moment; but he was so alert, and made such good use of his time,
that in another moment he was scouring away up a bye-street, after
shedding his cloak, hat, long hatband, white pocket-handkerchief,
and other symbolical tears.

These, the people tore to pieces and scattered far and wide with
great enjoyment, while the tradesmen hurriedly shut up their shops;
for a crowd in those times stopped at nothing, and was a monster
much dreaded.  They had already got the length of opening the hearse
to take the coffin out, when some brighter genius proposed instead,
its being escorted to its destination amidst general rejoicing.
Practical suggestions being much needed, this suggestion, too, was
received with acclamation, and the coach was immediately filled with
eight inside and a dozen out, while as many people got on the roof of
the hearse as could by any exercise of ingenuity stick upon it.
Among the first of these volunteers was Jerry Cruncher himself, who
modestly concealed his spiky head from the observation of Tellson's,
in the further corner of the mourning coach.

The officiating undertakers made some protest against these changes
in the ceremonies; but, the river being alarmingly near, and several
voices remarking on the efficacy of cold immersion in bringing
refractory members of the profession to reason, the protest was faint
and brief.  The remodelled procession started, with a chimney-sweep
driving the hearse--advised by the regular driver, who was perched
beside him, under close inspection, for the purpose--and with a pieman,
also attended by his cabinet minister, driving the mourning coach.
A bear-leader, a popular street character of the time, was impressed
as an additional ornament, before the cavalcade had gone far down
the Strand; and his bear, who was black and very mangy, gave quite
an Undertaking air to that part of the procession in which he walked.

Thus, with beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, song-roaring, and infinite
caricaturing of woe, the disorderly procession went its way, recruiting
at every step, and all the shops shutting up before it.  Its destination
was the old church of Saint Pancras, far off in the fields.  It got
there in course of time; insisted on pouring into the burial-ground;
finally, accomplished the interment of the deceased Roger Cly in
its own way, and highly to its own satisfaction.

The dead man disposed of, and the crowd being under the necessity of
providing some other entertainment for itself, another brighter genius
(or perhaps the same) conceived the humour of impeaching casual
passers-by, as Old Bailey spies, and wreaking vengeance on them.
Chase was given to some scores of inoffensive persons who had never
been near the Old Bailey in their lives, in the realisation of this
fancy, and they were roughly hustled and maltreated.  The transition
to the sport of window-breaking, and thence to the plundering of
public-houses, was easy and natural.  At last, after several hours,
when sundry summer-houses had been pulled down, and some area-railings
had been torn up, to arm the more belligerent spirits, a rumour got
about that the Guards were coming.  Before this rumour, the crowd
gradually melted away, and perhaps the Guards came, and perhaps they
never came, and this was the usual progress of a mob.

Mr. Cruncher did not assist at the closing sports, but had remained
behind in the churchyard, to confer and condole with the undertakers.
The place had a soothing influence on him.  He procured a pipe from a
neighbouring public-house, and smoked it, looking in at the railings
and maturely considering the spot.

"Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, apostrophising himself in his usual way,
"you see that there Cly that day, and you see with your own eyes that
he was a young 'un and a straight made 'un."

Having smoked his pipe out, and ruminated a little longer, he turned
himself about, that he might appear, before the hour of closing, on his
station at Tellson's.  Whether his meditations on mortality had touched
his liver, or whether his general health had been previously at all
amiss, or whether he desired to show a little attention to an eminent
man, is not so much to the purpose, as that he made a short call upon
his medical adviser--a distinguished surgeon--on his way back.

Young Jerry relieved his father with dutiful interest, and reported No
job in his absence.  The bank closed, the ancient clerks came out, the
usual watch was set, and Mr. Cruncher and his son went home to tea.

"Now, I tell you where it is!" said Mr. Cruncher to his wife, on
entering.  "If, as a honest tradesman, my wenturs goes wrong to-night,
I shall make sure that you've been praying again me, and I shall work
you for it just the same as if I seen you do it."

The dejected Mrs. Cruncher shook her head.

"Why, you're at it afore my face!" said Mr. Cruncher, with signs of
angry apprehension.

"I am saying nothing."

"Well, then; don't meditate nothing.  You might as well flop as
meditate.  You may as well go again me one way as another.
Drop it altogether."

"Yes, Jerry."

"Yes, Jerry," repeated Mr. Cruncher sitting down to tea.  "Ah!
It IS yes, Jerry.  That's about it.  You may say yes, Jerry."

Mr. Cruncher had no particular meaning in these sulky corroborations,
but made use of them, as people not unfrequently do, to express
general ironical dissatisfaction.

"You and your yes, Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, taking a bite out of his
bread-and-butter, and seeming to help it down with a large invisible
oyster out of his saucer.  "Ah! I think so.  I believe you."

"You are going out to-night?" asked his decent wife, when he took
another bite.

"Yes, I am."

"May I go with you, father?" asked his son, briskly.

"No, you mayn't.  I'm a going--as your mother knows--a fishing.
That's where I'm going to.  Going a fishing."

"Your fishing-rod gets rayther rusty; don't it, father?"

"Never you mind."

"Shall you bring any fish home, father?"

"If I don't, you'll have short commons, to-morrow," returned that
gentleman, shaking his head; "that's questions enough for you; I
ain't a going out, till you've been long abed."

He devoted himself during the remainder of the evening to keeping
a most vigilant watch on Mrs. Cruncher, and sullenly holding her in
conversation that she might be prevented from meditating any petitions
to his disadvantage.  With this view, he urged his son to hold her in
conversation also, and led the unfortunate woman a hard life by dwelling
on any causes of complaint he could bring against her, rather than he
would leave her for a moment to her own reflections.  The devoutest
person could have rendered no greater homage to the efficacy of an honest
prayer than he did in this distrust of his wife.  It was as if a
professed unbeliever in ghosts should be frightened by a ghost story.

"And mind you!" said Mr. Cruncher.  "No games to-morrow!  If I,
as a honest tradesman, succeed in providing a jinte of meat or two,
none of your not touching of it, and sticking to bread.  If I,
as a honest tradesman, am able to provide a little beer, none of your
declaring on water.  When you go to Rome, do as Rome does.  Rome will
be a ugly customer to you, if you don't.  _I_'m your Rome, you know."

Then he began grumbling again:

"With your flying into the face of your own wittles and drink!  I don't
know how scarce you mayn't make the wittles and drink here, by your
flopping tricks and your unfeeling conduct.  Look at your boy:  he IS
your'n, ain't he?  He's as thin as a lath.  Do you call yourself a
mother, and not know that a mother's first duty is to blow her boy out?"

This touched Young Jerry on a tender place; who adjured his mother to
perform her first duty, and, whatever else she did or neglected, above
all things to lay especial stress on the discharge of that maternal
function so affectingly and delicately indicated by his other parent.

Thus the evening wore away with the Cruncher family, until Young Jerry
was ordered to bed, and his mother, laid under similar injunctions,
obeyed them.  Mr. Cruncher beguiled the earlier watches of the night
with solitary pipes, and did not start upon his excursion until nearly
one o'clock.  Towards that small and ghostly hour, he rose up from his
chair, took a key out of his pocket, opened a locked cupboard, and
brought forth a sack, a crowbar of convenient size, a rope and chain,
and other fishing tackle of that nature.  Disposing these articles about
him in skilful manner, he bestowed a parting defiance on Mrs. Cruncher,
extinguished the light, and went out.

Young Jerry, who had only made a feint of undressing when he went to bed,
was not long after his father.  Under cover of the darkness he followed
out of the room, followed down the stairs, followed down the court,
followed out into the streets.  He was in no uneasiness concerning
his getting into the house again, for it was full of lodgers, and the
door stood ajar all night.

Impelled by a laudable ambition to study the art and mystery of his
father's honest calling, Young Jerry, keeping as close to house fronts,
walls, and doorways, as his eyes were close to one another, held his
honoured parent in view.  The honoured parent steering Northward,
had not gone far, when he was joined by another disciple of
Izaak Walton, and the two trudged on together.

Within half an hour from the first starting, they were beyond the
winking lamps, and the more than winking watchmen, and were out upon
a lonely road.  Another fisherman was picked up here--and that so
silently, that if Young Jerry had been superstitious, he might have
supposed the second follower of the gentle craft to have, all of a
sudden, split himself into two.

The three went on, and Young Jerry went on, until the three stopped
under a bank overhanging the road.  Upon the top of the bank was a
low brick wall, surmounted by an iron railing.  In the shadow of bank
and wall the three turned out of the road, and up a blind lane, of which
the wall--there, risen to some eight or ten feet high--formed one side.
Crouching down in a corner, peeping up the lane, the next object that
Young Jerry saw, was the form of his honoured parent, pretty well
defined against a watery and clouded moon, nimbly scaling an iron
gate.  He was soon over, and then the second fisherman got over, and
then the third.  They all dropped softly on the ground within the gate,
and lay there a little--listening perhaps.  Then, they moved away on
their hands and knees.

It was now Young Jerry's turn to approach the gate:  which he did,
holding his breath.  Crouching down again in a corner there, and looking
in, he made out the three fishermen creeping through some rank grass!
and all the gravestones in the churchyard--it was a large churchyard
that they were in--looking on like ghosts in white, while the church
tower itself looked on Eke the ghost of a monstrous giant.  They did
not creep far, before they stopped and stood upright.  And then they
began to fish.

They fished with a spade, at first.  Presently the honoured parent
appeared to be adjusting some instrument like a great corkscrew.
Whatever tools they worked with, they worked hard, until the awful
striking of the church clock so terrified Young Jerry, that he made off,
with his hair as stiff as his father's.

But, his long-cherished desire to know more about these matters, not
only stopped him in his running away, but lured him back again.  They
were still fishing perseveringly, when he peeped in at the gate for
the second time; but, now they seemed to have got a bite.  There was a
screwing and complaining sound down below, and their bent figures were
strained, as if by a weight.  By slow degrees the weight broke away the
earth upon it, and came to the surface.  Young Jerry very well knew what
it would be; but, when he saw it, and saw his honoured parent about to
wrench it open, he was so frightened, being new to the sight, that he
made off again, and never stopped until he had run a mile or more.

He would not have stopped then, for anything less necessary than
breath, it being a spectral sort of race that he ran, and one highly
desirable to get to the end of.  He had a strong idea that the coffin
he had seen was running after him; and, pictured as hopping on behind
him, bolt upright, upon its narrow end, always on the point of
overtaking him and hopping on at his side--perhaps taking his arm--
it was a pursuer to shun.  It was an inconsistent and ubiquitous fiend
too, for, while it was making the whole night behind him dreadful,
he darted out into the roadway to avoid dark alleys, fearful of its
coming hopping out of them like a dropsical boy's-Kite without tail
and wings.  It hid in doorways too, rubbing its horrible shoulders
against doors, and drawing them up to its ears, as if it were laughing.
It got into shadows on the road, and lay cunningly on its back to
trip him up.  All this time it was incessantly hopping on behind and
gaining on him, so that when the boy got to his own door he had reason
for being half dead.  And even then it would not leave him, but followed
him upstairs with a bump on every stair, scrambled into bed with him,
and bumped down, dead and heavy, on his breast when he fell asleep.

>From his oppressed slumber, Young Jerry in his closet was awakened
after daybreak and before sunrise, by the presence of his father in
the family room.  Something had gone wrong with him; at least, so
Young Jerry inferred, from the circumstance of his holding
Mrs. Cruncher by the ears, and knocking the back of her head against
the head-board of the bed.

"I told you I would," said Mr. Cruncher, "and I did."

"Jerry, Jerry, Jerry!" his wife implored.

"You oppose yourself to the profit of the business," said Jerry,
"and me and my partners suffer.  You was to honour and obey;
why the devil don't you?"

"I try to be a good wife, Jerry," the poor woman protested, with tears.

"Is it being a good wife to oppose your husband's business?  Is it
honouring your husband to dishonour his business?  Is it obeying your
husband to disobey him on the wital subject of his business?"

"You hadn't taken to the dreadful business then, Jerry."

"It's enough for you," retorted Mr. Cruncher, "to be the wife of a
honest tradesman, and not to occupy your female mind with calculations
when he took to his trade or when he didn't.  A honouring and obeying
wife would let his trade alone altogether.  Call yourself a religious
woman?  If you're a religious woman, give me a irreligious one!
You have no more nat'ral sense of duty than the bed of this here Thames
river has of a pile, and similarly it must be knocked into you."

The altercation was conducted in a low tone of voice, and terminated
in the honest tradesman's kicking off his clay-soiled boots, and lying
down at his length on the floor.  After taking a timid peep at him
lying on his back, with his rusty hands under his head for a pillow,
his son lay down too, and fell asleep again.

There was no fish for breakfast, and not much of anything else.
Mr. Cruncher was out of spirits, and out of temper, and kept an iron
pot-lid by him as a projectile for the correction of Mrs. Cruncher,
in case he should observe any symptoms of her saying Grace.  He was
brushed and washed at the usual hour, and set off with his son to
pursue his ostensible calling.

Young Jerry, walking with the stool under his arm at his father's
side along sunny and crowded Fleet-street, was a very different
Young Jerry from him of the previous night, running home through
darkness and solitude from his grim pursuer.  His cunning was fresh
with the day, and his qualms were gone with the night--in which
particulars it is not improbable that he had compeers in Fleet-street
and the City of London, that fine morning.

"Father," said Young Jerry, as they walked along:  taking care to
keep at arm's length and to have the stool well between them:
"what's a Resurrection-Man?"

Mr. Cruncher came to a stop on the pavement before he answered,
"How should I know?"

"I thought you knowed everything, father," said the artless boy.

"Hem!  Well," returned Mr. Cruncher, going on again, and lifting off
his hat to give his spikes free play, "he's a tradesman."

"What's his goods, father?" asked the brisk Young Jerry.

"His goods," said Mr. Cruncher, after turning it over in his mind,
"is a branch of Scientific goods."

"Persons' bodies, ain't it, father?" asked the lively boy.

"I believe it is something of that sort," said Mr. Cruncher.

"Oh, father, I should so like to be a Resurrection-Man when I'm
quite growed up!"

Mr. Cruncher was soothed, but shook his head in a dubious and moral
way.  "It depends upon how you dewelop your talents.  Be careful
to dewelop your talents, and never to say no more than you can help
to nobody, and there's no telling at the present time what you may
not come to be fit for."  As Young Jerry, thus encouraged, went on
a few yards in advance, to plant the stool in the shadow of the Bar,
Mr. Cruncher added to himself:  "Jerry, you honest tradesman, there's
hopes wot that boy will yet be a blessing to you, and a recompense
to you for his mother!"



XV

Knitting


There had been earlier drinking than usual in the wine-shop of
Monsieur Defarge.  As early as six o'clock in the morning, sallow
faces peeping through its barred windows had descried other faces within,
bending over measures of wine.  Monsieur Defarge sold a very thin wine
at the best of times, but it would seem to have been an unusually thin
wine that he sold at this time.  A sour wine, moreover, or a souring,
for its influence on the mood of those who drank it was to make them
gloomy.  No vivacious Bacchanalian flame leaped out of the pressed grape
of Monsieur Defarge:  but, a smouldering fire that burnt in the dark,
lay hidden in the dregs of it.

This had been the third morning in succession, on which there had been
early drinking at the wine-shop of Monsieur Defarge.  It had begun
on Monday, and here was Wednesday come.  There had been more of early
brooding than drinking; for, many men had listened and whispered and
slunk about there from the time of the opening of the door, who could
not have laid a piece of money on the counter to save their souls.
These were to the full as interested in the place, however, as if
they could have commanded whole barrels of wine; and they glided from
seat to seat, and from corner to corner, swallowing talk in lieu
of drink, with greedy looks.

Notwithstanding an unusual flow of company, the master of the wine-shop
was not visible.  He was not missed; for, nobody who crossed the
threshold looked for him, nobody asked for him, nobody wondered to
see only Madame Defarge in her seat, presiding over the distribution
of wine, with a bowl of battered small coins before her, as much defaced
and beaten out of their original impress as the small coinage of humanity
from whose ragged pockets they had come.

A suspended interest and a prevalent absence of mind, were perhaps
observed by the spies who looked in at the wine-shop, as they looked in
at every place, high and low, from the kings palace to the criminal's
gaol.  Games at cards languished, players at dominoes musingly built
towers with them, drinkers drew figures on the tables with spilt drops
of wine, Madame Defarge herself picked out the pattern on her sleeve
with her toothpick, and saw and heard something inaudible and invisible
a long way off.

Thus, Saint Antoine in this vinous feature of his, until midday.  It
was high noontide, when two dusty men passed through his streets and
under his swinging lamps:  of whom, one was Monsieur Defarge:  the other
a mender of roads in a blue cap.  All adust and athirst, the two entered
the wine-shop.  Their arrival had lighted a kind of fire in the breast
of Saint Antoine, fast spreading as they came along, which stirred and
flickered in flames of faces at most doors and windows.  Yet, no one
had followed them, and no man spoke when they entered the wine-shop,
though the eyes of every man there were turned upon them.

"Good day, gentlemen!" said Monsieur Defarge.

It may have been a signal for loosening the general tongue.
It elicited an answering chorus of "Good day!"

"It is bad weather, gentlemen," said Defarge, shaking his head.

Upon which, every man looked at his neighbour, and then an cast down
their eyes and sat silent.  Except one man, who got up and went out.

"My wife," said Defarge aloud, addressing Madame Defarge:  "I have
travelled certain leagues with this good mender of roads, called
Jacques.  I met him--by accident--a day and half's journey out of
Paris.  He is a good child, this mender of roads, called Jacques.
Give him to drink, my wife!"

A second man got up and went out.  Madame Defarge set wine before the
mender of roads called Jacques, who doffed his blue cap to the company,
and drank.  In the breast of his blouse he carried some coarse dark
bread; he ate of this between whiles, and sat munching and drinking
near Madame Defarge's counter.  A third man got up and went out.

Defarge refreshed himself with a draught of wine--but, he took less
than was given to the stranger, as being himself a man to whom it was
no rarity--and stood waiting until the countryman had made his breakfast.
He looked at no one present, and no one now looked at him; not even
Madame Defarge, who had taken up her knitting, and was at work.

"Have you finished your repast, friend?" he asked, in due season.

"Yes, thank you."

"Come, then!  You shall see the apartment that I told you you could
occupy.  It will suit you to a marvel."

Out of the wine-shop into the street, out of the street into a
courtyard, out of the courtyard up a steep staircase, out of the
staircase into a garret,--formerly the garret where a white-haired
man sat on a low bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.

No white-haired man was there now; but, the three men were there
who had gone out of the wine-shop singly.  And between them and the
white-haired man afar off, was the one small link, that they had once
looked in at him through the chinks in the wall.

Defarge closed the door carefully, and spoke in a subdued voice:

"Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques Three!  This is the witness
encountered by appointment, by me, Jacques Four.  He will tell you all.
Speak, Jacques Five!"

The mender of roads, blue cap in hand, wiped his swarthy forehead with
it, and said, "Where shall I commence, monsieur?"

"Commence," was Monsieur Defarge's not unreasonable reply, "at the
commencement."

"I saw him then, messieurs," began the mender of roads, "a year ago
this running summer, underneath the carriage of the Marquis, hanging by
the chain.  Behold the manner of it.  I leaving my work on the road,
the sun going to bed, the carriage of the Marquis slowly ascending
the hill, he hanging by the chain--like this."

Again the mender of roads went through the whole performance; in which
he ought to have been perfect by that time, seeing that it had been
the infallible resource and indispensable entertainment of his village
during a whole year.

Jacques One struck in, and asked if he had ever seen the man before?

"Never," answered the mender of roads, recovering his perpendicular.

Jacques Three demanded how he afterwards recognised him then?

"By his tall figure," said the mender of roads, softly, and with his
finger at his nose.  "When Monsieur the Marquis demands that evening,
'Say, what is he like?' I make response, `Tall as a spectre.'"

"You should have said, short as a dwarf," returned Jacques Two.

"But what did I know?  The deed was not then accomplished, neither did
he confide in me.  Observe!  Under those circumstances even, I do not
offer my testimony.  Monsieur the Marquis indicates me with his finger,
standing near our little fountain, and says, `To me!  Bring that rascal!'
My faith, messieurs, I offer nothing."

"He is right there, Jacques," murmured Defarge, to him who had
interrupted.  "Go on!"

"Good!" said the mender of roads, with an air of mystery.  "The tall
man is lost, and he is sought--how many months?  Nine, ten, eleven?"

"No matter, the number," said Defarge.  "He is well hidden, but at last
he is unluckily found.  Go on!"

"I am again at work upon the hill-side, and the sun is again about to
go to bed.  I am collecting my tools to descend to my cottage down in
the village below, where it is already dark, when I raise my eyes,
and see coming over the hill six soldiers.  In the midst of them
is a tall man with his arms bound--tied to his sides--like this!"

With the aid of his indispensable cap, he represented a man with his
elbows bound fast at his hips, with cords that were knotted behind him.

"I stand aside, messieurs, by my heap of stones, to see the soldiers
and their prisoner pass (for it is a solitary road, that, where any
spectacle is well worth looking at), and at first, as they approach,
I see no more than that they are six soldiers with a tall man bound,
and that they are almost black to my sight--except on the side of the
sun going to bed, where they have a red edge, messieurs.  Also, I see
that their long shadows are on the hollow ridge on the opposite side
of the road, and are on the hill above it, and are like the shadows of
giants.  Also, I see that they are covered with dust, and that the dust
moves with them as they come, tramp, tramp!  But when they advance
quite near to me, I recognise the tall man, and he recognises me.
Ah, but he would be well content to precipitate himself over the
hill-side once again, as on the evening when he and I first encountered,
close to the same spot!"

He described it as if he were there, and it was evident that he saw
it vividly; perhaps he had not seen much in his life.

"I do not show the soldiers that I recognise the tall man; he does
not show the soldiers that he recognises me; we do it, and we know it,
with our eyes.  `Come on!' says the chief of that company, pointing to
the village, `bring him fast to his tomb!' and they bring him faster.
I follow.  His arms are swelled because of being bound so tight, his
wooden shoes are large and clumsy, and he is lame.  Because he is lame,
and consequently slow, they drive him with their guns--like this!"

He imitated the action of a man's being impelled forward by the
butt-ends of muskets.

"As they descend the hill like madmen running a race, he falls.
They laugh and pick him up again.  His face is bleeding and covered with
dust, but he cannot touch it; thereupon they laugh again.  They bring
him into the village; all the village runs to look; they take him past
the mill, and up to the prison; all the village sees the prison gate
open in the darkness of the night, and swallow him--like this!"

He opened his mouth as wide as he could, and shut it with a sounding
snap of his teeth.  Observant of his unwillingness to mar the effect
by opening it again, Defarge said, "Go on, Jacques."

"All the village," pursued the mender of roads, on tiptoe and in a
low voice, "withdraws; all the village whispers by the fountain;
all the village sleeps; all the village dreams of that unhappy one,
within the locks and bars of the prison on the crag, and never to come
out of it, except to perish.  In the morning, with my tools upon my
shoulder, eating my morsel of black bread as I go, I make a circuit
by the prison, on my way to my work.  There I see him, high up,
behind the bars of a lofty iron cage, bloody and dusty as last night,
looking through.  He has no hand free, to wave to me; I dare not call
to him; he regards me like a dead man."

Defarge and the three glanced darkly at one another.  The looks of
all of them were dark, repressed, and revengeful, as they listened to
the countryman's story; the manner of all of them, while it was secret,
was authoritative too.  They had the air of a rough tribunal; Jacques
One and Two sitting on the old pallet-bed, each with his chin resting
on his hand, and his eyes intent on the road-mender; Jacques Three,
equally intent, on one knee behind them, with his agitated hand always
gliding over the network of fine nerves about his mouth and nose;
Defarge standing between them and the narrator, whom he had stationed
in the light of the window, by turns looking from him to them, and
from them to him.

"Go on, Jacques," said Defarge.

"He remains up there in his iron cage some days.  The village looks
at him by stealth, for it is afraid.  But it always looks up, from
a distance, at the prison on the crag; and in the evening, when the
work of the day is achieved and it assembles to gossip at the fountain,
all faces are turned towards the prison.  Formerly, they were turned
towards the posting-house; now, they are turned towards the prison.
They whisper at the fountain, that although condemned to death he will
not be executed; they say that petitions have been presented in Paris,
showing that he was enraged and made mad by the death of his child;
they say that a petition has been presented to the King himself.
What do I know?  It is possible.  Perhaps yes, perhaps no."

"Listen then, Jacques," Number One of that name sternly interposed.
"Know that a petition was presented to the King and Queen.  All here,
yourself excepted, saw the King take it, in his carriage in the street,
sitting beside the Queen.  It is Defarge whom you see here, who,
at the hazard of his life, darted out before the horses, with the
petition in his hand."

"And once again listen, Jacques!" said the kneeling Number Three:
his fingers ever wandering over and over those fine nerves, with a
strikingly greedy air, as if he hungered for something--that was
neither food nor drink; "the guard, horse and foot, surrounded
the petitioner, and struck him blows.  You hear?"

"I hear, messieurs."

"Go on then," said Defarge.

"Again; on the other hand, they whisper at the fountain," resumed the
countryman, "that he is brought down into our country to be executed
on the spot, and that he will very certainly be executed.  They even
whisper that because he has slain Monseigneur, and because Monseigneur
was the father of his tenants--serfs--what you will--he will be
executed as a parricide.  One old man says at the fountain, that his
right hand, armed with the knife, will be burnt off before his face;
that, into wounds which will be made in his arms, his breast,
and his legs, there will be poured boiling oil, melted lead, hot resin,
wax, and sulphur; finally, that he will be torn limb from limb by four
strong horses.  That old man says, all this was actually done to a
prisoner who made an attempt on the life of the late King,
Louis Fifteen.  But how do I know if he lies?  I am not a scholar."

"Listen once again then, Jacques!" said the man with the restless hand
and the craving air.  "The name of that prisoner was Damiens, and it
was all done in open day, in the open streets of this city of Paris;
and nothing was more noticed in the vast concourse that saw it done,
than the crowd of ladies of quality and fashion, who were full of eager
attention to the last--to the last, Jacques, prolonged until nightfall,
when he had lost two legs and an arm, and still breathed!  And it
was done--why, how old are you?"

"Thirty-five," said the mender of roads, who looked sixty.

"It was done when you were more than ten years old; you might
have seen it."

"Enough!" said Defarge, with grim impatience.  "Long live the Devil!
Go on."

"Well!  Some whisper this, some whisper that; they speak of nothing else;
even the fountain appears to fall to that tune.  At length, on Sunday
night when all the village is asleep, come soldiers, winding down from
the prison, and their guns ring on the stones of the little street.
Workmen dig, workmen hammer, soldiers laugh and sing; in the morning,
by the fountain, there is raised a gallows forty feet high, poisoning
the water."

The mender of roads looked THROUGH rather than AT the low ceiling,
and pointed as if he saw the gallows somewhere in the sky.

"All work is stopped, all assemble there, nobody leads the cows out,
the cows are there with the rest.  At midday, the roll of drums.
Soldiers have marched into the prison in the night, and he is in the
midst of many soldiers.  He is bound as before, and in his mouth there
is a gag--tied so, with a tight string, making him look almost as if he
laughed."  He suggested it, by creasing his face with his two thumbs,
from the corners of his mouth to his ears.  "On the top of the gallows
is fixed the knife, blade upwards, with its point in the air.  He is
hanged there forty feet high--and is left hanging, poisoning the water."

They looked at one another, as he used his blue cap to wipe his face,
on which the perspiration had started afresh while he recalled the spectacle.

"It is frightful, messieurs.  How can the women and the children draw
water!  Who can gossip of an evening, under that shadow!  Under it,
have I said?  When I left the village, Monday evening as the sun was
going to bed, and looked back from the hill, the shadow struck across
the church, across the mill, across the prison--seemed to strike across
the earth, messieurs, to where the sky rests upon it!"

The hungry man gnawed one of his fingers as he looked at the other
three, and his finger quivered with the craving that was on him.

"That's all, messieurs.  I left at sunset (as I had been warned to do),
and I walked on, that night and half next day, until I met (as I was
warned I should) this comrade.  With him, I came on, now riding and
now walking, through the rest of yesterday and through last night.
And here you see me!"

After a gloomy silence, the first Jacques said, "Good!  You have
acted and recounted faithfully.  Will you wait for us a little,
outside the door?"

"Very willingly," said the mender of roads.  Whom Defarge escorted
to the top of the stairs, and, leaving seated there, returned.

The three had risen, and their heads were together when he came
back to the garret.

"How say you, Jacques?" demanded Number One.  "To be registered?"

"To be registered, as doomed to destruction," returned Defarge.

"Magnificent!" croaked the man with the craving.

"The chateau, and all the race?" inquired the first.

"The chateau and all the race," returned Defarge.  "Extermination."

The hungry man repeated, in a rapturous croak, "Magnificent!" and began
gnawing another finger.

"Are you sure," asked Jacques Two, of Defarge, "that no embarrassment
can arise from our manner of keeping the register?  Without doubt it
is safe, for no one beyond ourselves can decipher it; but shall we
always be able to decipher it--or, I ought to say, will she?"

"Jacques," returned Defarge, drawing himself up, "if madame my wife
undertook to keep the register in her memory alone, she would not
lose a word of it--not a syllable of it.  Knitted, in her own stitches
and her own symbols, it will always be as plain to her as the sun.
Confide in Madame Defarge.  It would be easier for the weakest poltroon
that lives, to erase himself from existence, than to erase one letter
of his name or crimes from the knitted register of Madame Defarge."

There was a murmur of confidence and approval, and then the man who
hungered, asked:  "Is this rustic to be sent back soon?  I hope so.
He is very simple; is he not a little dangerous?"

"He knows nothing," said Defarge; "at least nothing more than would
easily elevate himself to a gallows of the same height.  I charge myself
with him; let him remain with me; I will take care of him, and set him
on his road.  He wishes to see the fine world--the King, the Queen, and
Court; let him see them on Sunday."

"What?" exclaimed the hungry man, staring.  "Is it a good sign, that
he wishes to see Royalty and Nobility?"

"Jacques," said Defarge; "judiciously show a cat milk, if you wish
her to thirst for it.  Judiciously show a dog his natural prey,
if you wish him to bring it down one day."

Nothing more was said, and the mender of roads, being found already
dozing on the topmost stair, was advised to lay himself down on the
pallet-bed and take some rest.  He needed no persuasion,
and was soon asleep.

Worse quarters than Defarge's wine-shop, could easily have been found
in Paris for a provincial slave of that degree.  Saving for a mysterious
dread of madame by which he was constantly haunted, his life was very
new and agreeable.  But, madame sat all day at her counter, so expressly
unconscious of him, and so particularly determined not to perceive that
his being there had any connection with anything below the surface,
that he shook in his wooden shoes whenever his eye lighted on her.
For, he contended with himself that it was impossible to foresee what
that lady might pretend next; and he felt assured that if she should
take it into her brightly ornamented head to pretend that she had seen
him do a murder and afterwards flay the victim, she would infallibly
go through with it until the play was played out.

Therefore, when Sunday came, the mender of roads was not enchanted
(though he said he was) to find that madame was to accompany monsieur
and himself to Versailles.  It was additionally disconcerting to have
madame knitting all the way there, in a public conveyance; it was
additionally disconcerting yet, to have madame in the crowd in the
afternoon, still with her knitting in her hands as the crowd waited
to see the carriage of the King and Queen.

"You work hard, madame," said a man near her.

"Yes," answered Madame Defarge; "I have a good deal to do."

"What do you make, madame?"

"Many things."

"For instance--"

"For instance," returned Madame Defarge, composedly, "shrouds."

The man moved a little further away, as soon as he could, and the
mender of roads fanned himself with his blue cap:  feeling it mightily
close and oppressive.  If he needed a King and Queen to restore him,
he was fortunate in having his remedy at hand; for, soon the large-faced
King and the fair-faced Queen came in their golden coach, attended by
the shining Bull's Eye of their Court, a glittering multitude of
laughing ladies and fine lords; and in jewels and silks and powder and
splendour and elegantly spurning figures and handsomely disdainful faces
of both sexes, the mender of roads bathed himself, so much to his
temporary intoxication, that he cried Long live the King, Long live
the Queen, Long live everybody and everything! as if he had never
heard of ubiquitous Jacques in his time.  Then, there were gardens,
courtyards, terraces, fountains, green banks, more King and Queen,
more Bull's Eye,more lords and ladies, more Long live they all! until
he absolutely wept with sentiment.  During the whole of this scene,
which lasted some three hours, he had plenty of shouting and weeping
and sentimental company, and throughout Defarge held him by the collar,
as if to restrain him from flying at the objects of his brief devotion
and tearing them to pieces.

"Bravo!" said Defarge, clapping him on the back when it was over,
like a patron; "you are a good boy!"

The mender of roads was now coming to himself, and was mistrustful of
having made a mistake in his late demonstrations; but no.

"You are the fellow we want," said Defarge, in his ear; "you make these
fools believe that it will last for ever.  Then, they are the more
insolent, and it is the nearer ended."

"Hey!" cried the mender of roads, reflectively; "that's true."

"These fools know nothing.  While they despise your breath, and would
stop it for ever and ever, in you or in a hundred like you rather than
in one of their own horses or dogs, they only know what your breath
tells them.  Let it deceive them, then, a little longer; it cannot
deceive them too much."

Madame Defarge looked superciliously at the client, and nodded in
confirmation.

"As to you," said she, "you would shout and shed tears for anything,
if it made a show and a noise.  Say!  Would you not?"

"Truly, madame, I think so.  For the moment."

"If you were shown a great heap of dolls, and were set upon them to
pluck them to pieces and despoil them for your own advantage, you
would pick out the richest and gayest.  Say!  Would you not?"

"Truly yes, madame."

"Yes.  And if you were shown a flock of birds, unable to fly, and were
set upon them to strip them of their feathers for your own advantage,
you would set upon the birds of the finest feathers; would you not?"

"It is true, madame."

"You have seen both dolls and birds to-day," said Madame Defarge,
with a wave of her hand towards the place where they had last been
apparent; "now, go home!"



XVI

Still Knitting


Madame Defarge and monsieur her husband returned amicably to the bosom
of Saint Antoine, while a speck in a blue cap toiled through the
darkness, and through the dust, and down the weary miles of avenue by
the wayside, slowly tending towards that point of the compass where the
chateau of Monsieur the Marquis, now in his grave, listened to the
whispering trees.  Such ample leisure had the stone faces, now, for
listening to the trees and to the fountain, that the few village
scarecrows who, in their quest for herbs to eat and fragments of dead
stick to burn, strayed within sight of the great stone courtyard and
terrace staircase, had it borne in upon their starved fancy that the
expression of the faces was altered.  A rumour just lived in the
village--had a faint and bare existence there, as its people had--that
when the knife struck home, the faces changed, from faces of pride to
faces of anger and pain; also, that when that dangling figure was
hauled up forty feet above the fountain, they changed again, and bore
a cruel look of being avenged, which they would henceforth bear
for ever.  In the stone face over the great window of the bed-chamber
where the murder was done, two fine dints were pointed out in the
sculptured nose, which everybody recognised, and which nobody had
seen of old; and on the scarce occasions when two or three ragged
peasants emerged from the crowd to take a hurried peep at Monsieur
the Marquis petrified, a skinny finger would not have pointed to it
for a minute, before they all started away among the moss and leaves,
like the more fortunate hares who could find a living there.

Chateau and hut, stone face and dangling figure, the red stain on the
stone floor, and the pure water in the village well--thousands of acres
of land--a whole province of France--all France itself--lay under the
night sky, concentrated into a faint hair-breadth line.  So does a
whole world, with all its greatnesses and littlenesses, lie in a
twinkling star.  And as mere human knowledge can split a ray of light
and analyse the manner of its composition, so, sublimer intelligences
may read in the feeble shining of this earth of ours, every thought
and act, every vice and virtue, of every responsible creature on it.

The Defarges, husband and wife, came lumbering under the starlight,
in their public vehicle, to that gate of Paris whereunto their journey
naturally tended.  There was the usual stoppage at the barrier
guardhouse, and the usual lanterns came glancing forth for the usual
examination and inquiry.  Monsieur Defarge alighted; knowing one or
two of the soldiery there, and one of the police.  The latter he was
intimate with, and affectionately embraced.

When Saint Antoine had again enfolded the Defarges in his dusky wings,
and they, having finally alighted near the Saint's boundaries, were
picking their way on foot through the black mud and offal of his streets,
Madame Defarge spoke to her husband:

"Say then, my friend; what did Jacques of the police tell thee?"

"Very little to-night, but all he knows.  There is another spy
commissioned for our quarter.  There may be many more, for all that
he can say, but he knows of one."

"Eh well!" said Madame Defarge, raising her eyebrows with a cool
business air.  "It is necessary to register him.  How do they
call that man?"

"He is English."

"So much the better.  His name?"

"Barsad," said Defarge, making it French by pronunciation.  But,
he had been so careful to get it accurately, that he then spelt
it with perfect correctness.

"Barsad," repeated madame.  "Good.  Christian name?"

"John."

"John Barsad," repeated madame, after murmuring it once to herself.
"Good.  His appearance; is it known?"

"Age, about forty years; height, about five feet nine; black hair;
complexion dark; generally, rather handsome visage; eyes dark, face thin,
long, and sallow; nose aquiline, but not straight, having a peculiar
inclination towards the left cheek; expression, therefore, sinister."

"Eh my faith.  It is a portrait!" said madame, laughing.  "He shall
be registered to-morrow."

They turned into the wine-shop, which was closed (for it was midnight),
and where Madame Defarge immediately took her post at her desk,
counted the small moneys that had been taken during her absence,
examined the stock, went through the entries in the book, made other
entries of her own, checked the serving man in every possible way,
and finally dismissed him to bed.  Then she turned out the contents
of the bowl of money for the second time, and began knotting them up
in her handkerchief, in a chain of separate knots, for safe keeping
through the night.  All this while, Defarge, with his pipe in his mouth,
walked up and down, complacently admiring, but never interfering;
in which condition, indeed, as to the business and his domestic affairs,
he walked up and down through life.

The night was hot, and the shop, close shut and surrounded by so foul
a neighbourhood, was ill-smelling.  Monsieur Defarge's olfactory
sense was by no means delicate, but the stock of wine smelt much
stronger than it ever tasted, and so did the stock of rum and brandy
and aniseed.  He whiffed the compound of scents away, as he put down
his smoked-out pipe.

"You are fatigued," said madame, raising her glance as she knotted
the money.  "There are only the usual odours."

"I am a little tired," her husband acknowledged.

"You are a little depressed, too," said madame, whose quick eyes had
never been so intent on the accounts, but they had had a ray or two
for him.  "Oh, the men, the men!"

"But my dear!" began Defarge.

"But my dear!" repeated madame, nodding firmly; "but my dear!
You are faint of heart to-night, my dear!"

"Well, then," said Defarge, as if a thought were wrung out of his breast,
"it IS a long time."

"It is a long time," repeated his wife; "and when is it not a long time?
Vengeance and retribution require a long time; it is the rule."

"It does not take a long time to strike a man with Lightning,"
said Defarge.

"How long," demanded madame, composedly, "does it take to make and
store the lightning?  Tell me."

Defarge raised his head thoughtfully, as if there were something
in that too.

"It does not take a long time," said madame, "for an earthquake to swallow
a town.  Eh well!  Tell me how long it takes to prepare the earthquake?"

"A long time, I suppose," said Defarge.

"But when it is ready, it takes place, and grinds to pieces everything
before it.  In the meantime, it is always preparing, though it is not
seen or heard.  That is your consolation.  Keep it."

She tied a knot with flashing eyes, as if it throttled a foe.

"I tell thee," said madame, extending her right hand, for emphasis,
"that although it is a long time on the road, it is on the road and
coming.  I tell thee it never retreats, and never stops.  I tell thee
it is always advancing.  Look around and consider the Eves of all the
world that we know, consider the faces of all the world that we know,
consider the rage and discontent to which the Jacquerie addresses itself
with more and more of certainty every hour.  Can such things last?
Bah!  I mock you."

"My brave wife," returned Defarge, standing before her with his head
a little bent, and his hands clasped at his back, like a docile and
attentive pupil before his catechist, "I do not question all this.
But it has lasted a long time, and it is possible--you know well,
my wife, it is possible--that it may not come, during our lives."

"Eh well!  How then?" demanded madame, tying another knot, as if
there were another enemy strangled.

"Well!" said Defarge, with a half complaining and half apologetic shrug.
"We shall not see the triumph."

"We shall have helped it," returned madame, with her extended hand in
strong action.  "Nothing that we do, is done in vain.  I believe, with
all my soul, that we shall see the triumph.  But even if not, even if
I knew certainly not, show me the neck of an aristocrat and tyrant,
and still I would--"

Then madame, with her teeth set, tied a very terrible knot indeed.

"Hold!" cried Defarge, reddening a little as if he felt charged with
cowardice; "I too, my dear, will stop at nothing."

"Yes!  But it is your weakness that you sometimes need to see your
victim and your opportunity, to sustain you.  Sustain yourself without
that.  When the time comes, let loose a tiger and a devil; but wait
for the time with the tiger and the devil chained--not shown--yet
always ready."

Madame enforced the conclusion of this piece of advice by striking
her little counter with her chain of money as if she knocked its brains
out, and then gathering the heavy handkerchief under her arm in a
serene manner, and observing that it was time to go to bed.

Next noontide saw the admirable woman in her usual place in the
wine-shop, knitting away assiduously.  A rose lay beside her, and
if she now and then glanced at the flower, it was with no infraction
of her usual preoccupied air.  There were a few customers, drinking
or not drinking, standing or seated, sprinkled about.  The day was
very hot, and heaps of flies, who were extending their inquisitive
and adventurous perquisitions into all the glutinous little glasses
near madame, fell dead at the bottom.  Their decease made no impression
on the other flies out promenading, who looked at them in the coolest
manner (as if they themselves were elephants, or something as far
removed), until they met the same fate.  Curious to consider how heedless
flies are!--perhaps they thought as much at Court that sunny summer day.

A figure entering at the door threw a shadow on Madame Defarge which
she felt to be a new one.  She laid down her knitting, and began to
pin her rose in her head-dress, before she looked at the figure.

It was curious.  The moment Madame Defarge took up the rose, the
customers ceased talking, and began gradually to drop out of the
wine-shop.

"Good day, madame," said the new-comer.

"Good day, monsieur."

She said it aloud, but added to herself, as she resumed her knitting:
"Hah!  Good day, age about forty, height about five feet nine, black
hair, generally rather handsome visage, complexion dark, eyes dark,
thin, long and sallow face, aquiline nose but not straight, having a
peculiar inclination towards the left cheek which imparts a sinister
expression!  Good day, one and all!"

"Have the goodness to give me a little glass of old cognac, and a
mouthful of cool fresh water, madame."

Madame complied with a polite air.

"Marvellous cognac this, madame!"

It was the first time it had ever been so complemented, and Madame
Defarge knew enough of its antecedents to know better.  She said,
however, that the cognac was flattered, and took up her knitting.
The visitor watched her fingers for a few moments, and took the
opportunity of observing the place in general.

"You knit with great skill, madame."

"I am accustomed to it."

"A pretty pattern too!"

"YOU think so?" said madame, looking at him with a smile.

"Decidedly.  May one ask what it is for?"

"Pastime," said madame, still looking at him with a smile while her
fingers moved nimbly.

"Not for use?"

"That depends.  I may find a use for it one day.  If I do--Well,"
said madame, drawing a breath and nodding her head with a stem kind
of coquetry, "I'll use it!"

It was remarkable; but, the taste of Saint Antoine seemed to be
decidedly opposed to a rose on the head-dress of Madame Defarge.
Two men had entered separately, and had been about to order drink, when,
catching sight of that novelty, they faltered, made a pretence of
looking about as if for some friend who was not there, and went away.
Nor, of those who had been there when this visitor entered, was there one
left.  They had all dropped off.  The spy had kept his eyes open, but had
been able to detect no sign.  They had lounged away in a poverty-stricken,
purposeless, accidental manner, quite natural and unimpeachable.

"JOHN," thought madame, checking off her work as her fingers knitted,
and her eyes looked at the stranger.  "Stay long enough, and I shall
knit `BARSAD' before you go."

"You have a husband, madame?"

"I have."

"Children?"

"No children."

"Business seems bad?"

"Business is very bad; the people are so poor."

"Ah, the unfortunate, miserable people!  So oppressed, too--as you say."

"As YOU say," madame retorted, correcting him, and deftly knitting
an extra something into his name that boded him no good.

"Pardon me; certainly it was I who said so, but you naturally think so.
Of course."

"_I_ think?" returned madame, in a high voice.  "I and my husband
have enough to do to keep this wine-shop open, without thinking.  All
we think, here, is how to live.  That is the subject WE think of,
and it gives us, from morning to night, enough to think about, without
embarrassing our heads concerning others.  _I_ think for others?  No, no."

The spy, who was there to pick up any crumbs he could find or make, did
not allow his baffled state to express itself in his sinister face; but,
stood with an air of gossiping gallantry, leaning his elbow on Madame
Defarge's little counter, and occasionally sipping his cognac.

"A bad business this, madame, of Gaspard's execution.  Ah! the poor
Gaspard!"  With a sigh of great compassion.

"My faith!" returned madame, coolly and lightly, "if people use knives
for such purposes, they have to pay for it.  He knew beforehand what
the price of his luxury was; he has paid the price."

"I believe," said the spy, dropping his soft voice to a tone that
invited confidence, and expressing an injured revolutionary
susceptibility in every muscle of his wicked face:  "I believe there
is much compassion and anger in this neighbourhood, touching the
poor fellow?  Between ourselves."

"Is there?" asked madame, vacantly.

"Is there not?"

"--Here is my husband!" said Madame Defarge.

As the keeper of the wine-shop entered at the door, the spy saluted
him by touching his hat, and saying, with an engaging smile, "Good
day, Jacques!"  Defarge stopped short, and stared at him.

"Good day, Jacques!" the spy repeated; with not quite so much
confidence, or quite so easy a smile under the stare.

"You deceive yourself, monsieur," returned the keeper of the
wine-shop.  "You mistake me for another.  That is not my name.
I am Ernest Defarge."

"It is all the same," said the spy, airily, but discomfited too:
"good day!"

"Good day!" answered Defarge, drily.

"I was saying to madame, with whom I had the pleasure of chatting when
you entered, that they tell me there is--and no wonder!--much sympathy
and anger in Saint Antoine, touching the unhappy fate of poor Gaspard."

"No one has told me so," said Defarge, shaking his head.  "I know
nothing of it."

Having said it, he passed behind the little counter, and stood with
his hand on the back of his wife's chair, looking over that barrier
at the person to whom they were both opposed, and whom either of them
would have shot with the greatest satisfaction.

The spy, well used to his business, did not change his unconscious
attitude, but drained his little glass of cognac, took a sip of fresh
water, and asked for another glass of cognac.  Madame Defarge poured it
out for him, took to her knitting again, and hummed a little song over it.

"You seem to know this quarter well; that is to say, better than I do?"
observed Defarge.

"Not at all, but I hope to know it better.  I am so profoundly interested
in its miserable inhabitants."

"Hah!" muttered Defarge.

"The pleasure of conversing with you, Monsieur Defarge, recalls to me,"
pursued the spy, "that I have the honour of cherishing some interesting
associations with your name."

"Indeed!" said Defarge, with much indifference.

"Yes, indeed.  When Doctor Manette was released, you, his old domestic,
had the charge of him, I know.  He was delivered to you.  You see I am
informed of the circumstances?"

"Such is the fact, certainly," said Defarge.  He had had it conveyed
to him, in an accidental touch of his wife's elbow as she knitted and
warbled, that he would do best to answer, but always with brevity.

"It was to you," said the spy, "that his daughter came; and it was
from your care that his daughter took him, accompanied by a neat brown
monsieur; how is he called?--in a little wig--Lorry--of the bank of
Tellson and Company--over to England."

"Such is the fact," repeated Defarge.

"Very interesting remembrances!" said the spy.  "I have known Doctor
Manette and his daughter, in England."

"Yes?" said Defarge.

"You don't hear much about them now?" said the spy.

"No," said Defarge.

"In effect," madame struck in, looking up from her work and her little
song, "we never hear about them.  We received the news of their safe
arrival, and perhaps another letter, or perhaps two; but, since then,
they have gradually taken their road in life--we, ours--and we have
held no correspondence."

"Perfectly so, madame," replied the spy.  "She is going to be married."

"Going?" echoed madame.  "She was pretty enough to have been married
long ago.  You English are cold, it seems to me."

"Oh!  You know I am English."

"I perceive your tongue is," returned madame; "and what the tongue is,
I suppose the man is."

He did not take the identification as a compliment; but he made the
best of it, and turned it off with a laugh.  After sipping his
cognac to the end, he added:

"Yes, Miss Manette is going to be married.  But not to an Englishman;
to one who, like herself, is French by birth.  And speaking of Gaspard
(ah, poor Gaspard!  It was cruel, cruel!), it is a curious thing that
she is going to marry the nephew of Monsieur the Marquis, for whom
Gaspard was exalted to that height of so many feet; in other words,
the present Marquis.  But he lives unknown in England, he is no
Marquis there; he is Mr. Charles Darnay.  D'Aulnais is the name
of his mother's family."

Madame Defarge knitted steadily, but the intelligence had a palpable
effect upon her husband.  Do what he would, behind the little counter,
as to the striking of a light and the lighting of his pipe, he was
troubled, and his hand was not trustworthy.  The spy would have been
no spy if he had failed to see it, or to record it in his mind.

Having made, at least, this one hit, whatever it might prove to be worth,
and no customers coming in to help him to any other, Mr. Barsad paid
for what he had drunk, and took his leave:  taking occasion to say, in a
genteel manner, before he departed, that he looked forward to the pleasure
of seeing Monsieur and Madame Defarge again.  For some minutes after he
had emerged into the outer presence of Saint Antoine, the husband and
wife remained exactly as he had left them, lest he should come back.

"Can it be true," said Defarge, in a low voice, looking down at his
wife as he stood smoking with his hand on the back of her chair:  "what
he has said of Ma'amselle Manette?"

"As he has said it," returned madame, lifting her eyebrows a little,
"it is probably false.  But it may be true."

"If it is--" Defarge began, and stopped.

"If it is?" repeated his wife.

"--And if it does come, while we live to see it triumph--I hope, for
her sake, Destiny will keep her husband out of France."

"Her husband's destiny," said Madame Defarge, with her usual composure,
"will take him where he is to go, and will lead him to the end that is
to end him.  That is all I know."

"But it is very strange--now, at least, is it not very strange"--said
Defarge, rather pleading with his wife to induce her to admit it,
"that, after all our sympathy for Monsieur her father, and herself,
her husband's name should be proscribed under your hand at this moment,
by the side of that infernal dog's who has just left us?"

"Stranger things than that will happen when it does come," answered
madame.  "I have them both here, of a certainty; and they are both
here for their merits; that is enough."

She roiled up her knitting when she had said those words, and presently
took the rose out of the handkerchief that was wound about her head.
Either Saint Antoine had an instinctive sense that the objectionable
decoration was gone, or Saint Antoine was on the watch for its
disappearance; howbeit, the Saint took courage to lounge in, very
shortly afterwards, and the wine-shop recovered its habitual aspect.

In the evening, at which season of all others Saint Antoine turned
himself inside out, and sat on door-steps and window-ledges, and
came to the corners of vile streets and courts, for a breath of air,
Madame Defarge with her work in her hand was accustomed to pass from
place to place and from group to group:  a Missionary--there were
many like her--such as the world will do well never to breed again.
All the women knitted.  They knitted worthless things; but, the
mechanical work was a mechanical substitute for eating and drinking;
the hands moved for the jaws and the digestive apparatus:  if the bony
fingers had been still, the stomachs would have been more famine-pinched.

But, as the fingers went, the eyes went, and the thoughts.  And as
Madame Defarge moved on from group to group, all three went quicker
and fiercer among every little knot of women that she had spoken with,
and left behind.

Her husband smoked at his door, looking after her with admiration.
"A great woman," said he, "a strong woman, a grand woman, a frightfully
grand woman!"

Darkness closed around, and then came the ringing of church bells and
the distant beating of the military drums in the Palace Courtyard, as
the women sat knitting, knitting.  Darkness encompassed them.  Another
darkness was closing in as surely, when the church bells, then ringing
pleasantly in many an airy steeple over France, should be melted into
thundering cannon; when the military drums should be beating to drown
a wretched voice, that night all potent as the voice of Power and
Plenty, Freedom and Life.  So much was closing in about the women
who sat knitting, knitting, that they their very selves were closing
in around a structure yet unbuilt, where they were to sit knitting,
knitting, counting dropping heads.



XVII

One Night


Never did the sun go down with a brighter glory on the quiet corner
in Soho, than one memorable evening when the Doctor and his daughter
sat under the plane-tree together.  Never did the moon rise with a
milder radiance over great London, than on that night when it found
them still seated under the tree, and shone upon their faces
through its leaves.

Lucie was to be married to-morrow.  She had reserved this last
evening for her father, and they sat alone under the plane-tree.

"You are happy, my dear father?"

"Quite, my child."

They had said little, though they had been there a long time.  When
it was yet light enough to work and read, she had neither engaged
herself in her usual work, nor had she read to him.  She had employed
herself in both ways, at his side under the tree, many and many a time;
but, this time was not quite like any other, and nothing could make it so.

"And I am very happy to-night, dear father.  I am deeply happy in the
love that Heaven has so blessed--my love for Charles, and Charles's
love for me.  But, if my life were not to be still consecrated to you,
or if my marriage were so arranged as that it would part us, even by
the length of a few of these streets, I should be more unhappy and
self-reproachful now than I can tell you.  Even as it is--"

Even as it was, she could not command her voice.

In the sad moonlight, she clasped him by the neck, and laid her face
upon his breast.  In the moonlight which is always sad, as the light
of the sun itself is--as the light called human life is--at its
coming and its going.

"Dearest dear!  Can you tell me, this last time, that you feel quite,
quite sure, no new affections of mine, and no new duties of mine,
will ever interpose between us?  _I_ know it well, but do you know it?
In your own heart, do you feel quite certain?"

Her father answered, with a cheerful firmness of conviction he could
scarcely have assumed, "Quite sure, my darling!  More than that,"
he added, as he tenderly kissed her:  "my future is far brighter,
Lucie,  seen through your marriage, than it could have been--nay,
than it  ever was--without it."

"If I could hope THAT, my father!--"

"Believe it, love!  Indeed it is so.  Consider how natural and how
plain it is, my dear, that it should be so.  You, devoted and young,
cannot fully appreciate the anxiety I have felt that your life
should not be wasted--"

She moved her hand towards his lips, but he took it in his,
and repeated the word.

"--wasted, my child--should not be wasted, struck aside from the
natural order of things--for my sake.  Your unselfishness cannot
entirely comprehend how much my mind has gone on this; but, only ask
yourself, how could my happiness be perfect, while yours was incomplete?"

"If I had never seen Charles, my father, I should have been quite
happy with you."

He smiled at her unconscious admission that she would have been unhappy
without Charles, having seen him; and replied:

"My child, you did see him, and it is Charles.  If it had not been
Charles, it would have been another.  Or, if it had been no other,
I should have been the cause, and then the dark part of my life would
have cast its shadow beyond myself, and would have fallen on you."

It was the first time, except at the trial, of her ever hearing him refer
to the period of his suffering.  It gave her a strange and new sensation
while his words were in her ears; and she remembered it long afterwards.

"See!" said the Doctor of Beauvais, raising his hand towards the moon.
"I have looked at her from my prison-window, when I could not bear
her light.  I have looked at her when it has been such torture to me
to think of her shining upon what I had lost, that I have beaten my
head against my prison-walls.  I have looked at her, in a state so
dun and lethargic, that I have thought of nothing but the number of
horizontal lines I could draw across her at the full, and the number of
perpendicular lines with which I could intersect them."  He added in his
inward and pondering manner, as he looked at the moon, "It was twenty
either way, I remember, and the twentieth was difficult to squeeze in."

The strange thrill with which she heard him go back to that time,
deepened as he dwelt upon it; but, there was nothing to shock her in
the manner of his reference.  He only seemed to contrast his present
cheerfulness and felicity with the dire endurance that was over.

"I have looked at her, speculating thousands of times upon the unborn
child from whom I had been rent.  Whether it was alive.  Whether it had
been born alive, or the poor mother's shock had killed it.  Whether it
was a son who would some day avenge his father. (There was a time in my
imprisonment, when my desire for vengeance was unbearable.)  Whether it
was a son who would never know his father's story; who might even live
to weigh the possibility of his father's having disappeared of his own
will and act.  Whether it was a daughter who would grow to be a woman."

She drew closer to him, and kissed his cheek and his hand.

"I have pictured my daughter, to myself, as perfectly forgetful of me
--rather, altogether ignorant of me, and unconscious of me.  I have
cast up the years of her age, year after year.  I have seen her married
to a man who knew nothing of my fate.  I have altogether perished from
the remembrance of the living, and in the next generation my place
was a blank."

"My father!  Even to hear that you had such thoughts of a daughter
who never existed, strikes to my heart as if I had been that child."

"You, Lucie?  It is out of the Consolation and restoration you have
brought to me, that these remembrances arise, and pass between us and
the moon on this last night.--What did I say just now?"

"She knew nothing of you.  She cared nothing for you."

"So!  But on other moonlight nights, when the sadness and the silence
have touched me in a different way--have affected me with something as
like a sorrowful sense of peace, as any emotion that had pain for its
foundations could--I have imagined her as coming to me in my cell, and
leading me out into the freedom beyond the fortress.  I have seen her
image in the moonlight often, as I now see you; except that I never held
her in my arms; it stood between the little grated window and the door.
But, you understand that that was not the child I am speaking of?"

"The figure was not; the--the--image; the fancy?"

"No.  That was another thing.  It stood before my disturbed sense of
sight, but it never moved.  The phantom that my mind pursued, was
another and more real child.  Of her outward appearance I know no more
than that she was like her mother.  The other had that likeness too
--as you have--but was not the same.  Can you follow me, Lucie?
Hardly, I think?  I doubt you must have been a solitary prisoner to
understand these perplexed distinctions."

His collected and calm manner could not prevent her blood from running
cold, as he thus tried to anatomise his old condition.

"In that more peaceful state, I have imagined her, in the moonlight,
coming to me and taking me out to show me that the home of her married
life was full of her loving remembrance of her lost father.  My picture
was in her room, and I was in her prayers.  Her life was active,
cheerful, useful; but my poor history pervaded it all."

"I was that child, my father, I was not half so good, but in my love
that was I."

"And she showed me her children," said the Doctor of Beauvais, "and
they had heard of me, and had been taught to pity me.  When they
passed a prison of the State, they kept far from its frowning walls,
and looked up at its bars, and spoke in whispers.  She could never
deliver me; I imagined that she always brought me back after showing
me such things.  But then, blessed with the relief of tears,
I fell upon my knees, and blessed her."

"I am that child, I hope, my father.  O my dear, my dear, will you
bless me as fervently to-morrow?"

"Lucie, I recall these old troubles in the reason that I have to-night
for loving you better than words can tell, and thanking God for my
great happiness.  My thoughts, when they were wildest, never rose near
the happiness that I have known with you, and that we have before us."

He embraced her, solemnly commended her to Heaven, and humbly thanked
Heaven for having bestowed her on him.  By-and-bye, they went
into the house.

There was no one bidden to the marriage but Mr. Lorry; there was even
to be no bridesmaid but the gaunt Miss Pross.  The marriage was to
make no change in their place of residence; they had been able to
extend it, by taking to themselves the upper rooms formerly belonging
to the apocryphal invisible lodger, and they desired nothing more.

Doctor Manette was very cheerful at the little supper.  They were
only three at table, and Miss Pross made the third.  He regretted that
Charles was not there; was more than half disposed to object to the
loving little plot that kept him away; and drank to him affectionately.

So, the time came for him to bid Lucie good night, and they separated.
But, in the stillness of the third hour of the morning, Lucie came
downstairs again, and stole into his room; not free from unshaped fears,
beforehand.

All things, however, were in their places; all was quiet; and he lay
asleep, his white hair picturesque on the untroubled pillow, and his
hands lying quiet on the coverlet.  She put her needless candle in the
shadow at a distance, crept up to his bed, and put her lips to his;
then, leaned over him, and looked at him.

Into his handsome face, the bitter waters of captivity had worn; but,
he covered up their tracks with a determination so strong, that he held
the mastery of them even in his sleep.  A more remarkable face in its
quiet, resolute, and guarded struggle with an unseen assailant, was
not to be beheld in all the wide dominions of sleep, that night.

She timidly laid her hand on his dear breast, and put up a prayer that
she might ever be as true to him as her love aspired to be, and as his
sorrows deserved.  Then, she withdrew her hand, and kissed his lips
once more, and went away.  So, the sunrise came, and the shadows of
the leaves of the plane-tree moved upon his face, as softly as her
lips had moved in praying for him.



XVIII

Nine Days


The marriage-day was shining brightly, and they were ready outside
the closed door of the Doctor's room, where he was speaking with
Charles Darnay.  They were ready to go to church; the beautiful bride,
Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross--to whom the event, through a gradual process
of reconcilement to the inevitable, would have been one of absolute
bliss, but for the yet lingering consideration that her brother
Solomon should have been the bridegroom.

"And so," said Mr. Lorry, who could not sufficiently admire the bride,
and who had been moving round her to take in every point of her quiet,
pretty dress; "and so it was for this, my sweet Lucie, that I brought
you across the Channel, such a baby' Lord bless me' How little I
thought what I was doing!  How lightly I valued the obligation I was
conferring on my friend Mr. Charles!"

"You didn't mean it," remarked the matter-of-fact Miss Pross, "and
therefore how could you know it?  Nonsense!"

"Really?  Well; but don't cry," said the gentle Mr. Lorry.

"I am not crying," said Miss Pross; "YOU are."

"I, my Pross?" (By this time, Mr. Lorry dared to be pleasant with
her, on occasion.)

"You were, just now; I saw you do it, and I don't wonder at it.  Such
a present of plate as you have made 'em, is enough to bring tears into
anybody's eyes.  There's not a fork or a spoon in the collection,"
said Miss Pross, "that I didn't cry over, last night after the box came,
till I couldn't see it."

"I am highly gratified," said Mr. Lorry, "though, upon my honour, I
had no intention of rendering those trifling articles of remembrance
invisible to any one.  Dear me!  This is an occasion that makes a man
speculate on all he has lost.  Dear, dear, dear!  To think that there
might have been a Mrs. Lorry, any time these fifty years almost!"

"Not at all!"  From Miss Pross.

"You think there never might have been a Mrs. Lorry?" asked the
gentleman of that name.

"Pooh!" rejoined Miss Pross; "you were a bachelor in your cradle."

"Well!" observed Mr. Lorry, beamingly adjusting his little wig,
"that seems probable, too."

"And you were cut out for a bachelor," pursued Miss Pross, "before
you were put in your cradle."

"Then, I think," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was very unhandsomely dealt
with, and that I ought to have had a voice in the selection of my
pattern.  Enough!  Now, my dear Lucie," drawing his arm soothingly
round her waist, "I hear them moving in the next room, and Miss Pross
and I, as two formal folks of business, are anxious not to lose the
final opportunity of saying something to you that you wish to hear.
You leave your good father, my dear, in hands as earnest and as
loving as your own; he shall be taken every conceivable care of;
during the next fortnight, while you are in Warwickshire and thereabouts,
even Tellson's shall go to the wall (comparatively speaking) before him.
And when, at the fortnight's end, he comes to join you and your beloved
husband, on your other fortnight's trip in Wales, you shall say that
we have sent him to you in the best health and in the happiest frame.
Now, I hear Somebody's step coming to the door.  Let me kiss my dear
girl with an old-fashioned bachelor blessing, before Somebody comes
to claim his own."

For a moment, he held the fair face from him to look at the
well-remembered expression on the forehead, and then laid the bright
golden hair against his little brown wig, with a genuine tenderness and
delicacy which, if such things be old-fashioned, were as old as Adam.

The door of the Doctor's room opened, and he came out with Charles
Darnay.  He was so deadly pale--which had not been the case when they
went in together--that no vestige of colour was to be seen in his face.
But, in the composure of his manner he was unaltered, except that to
the shrewd glance of Mr. Lorry it disclosed some shadowy indication
that the old air of avoidance and dread had lately passed over him,
like a cold wind.

He gave his arm to his daughter, and took her down-stairs to the chariot
which Mr. Lorry had hired in honour of the day.  The rest followed in
another carriage, and soon, in a neighbouring church, where no strange
eyes looked on, Charles Darnay and Lucie Manette were happily married.

Besides the glancing tears that shone among the smiles of the little
group when it was done, some diamonds, very bright and sparkling,
glanced on the bride's hand, which were newly released from the dark
obscurity of one of Mr. Lorry's pockets.  They returned home to
breakfast, and all went well, and in due course the golden hair that
had mingled with the poor shoemaker's white locks in the Paris garret,
were mingled with them again in the morning sunlight, on the threshold
of the door at parting.

It was a hard parting, though it was not for long.  But her father
cheered her, and said at last, gently disengaging himself from her
enfolding arms, "Take her, Charles!  She is yours!"

And her agitated hand waved to them from a chaise window, and
she was gone.

The corner being out of the way of the idle and curious, and the
preparations having been very simple and few, the Doctor, Mr. Lorry,
and Miss Pross, were left quite alone.  It was when they turned into
the welcome shade of the cool old hall, that Mr. Lorry observed a
great change to have come over the Doctor; as if the golden arm
uplifted there, had struck him a poisoned blow.

He had naturally repressed much, and some revulsion might have been
expected in him when the occasion for repression was gone.  But, it
was the old scared lost look that troubled Mr. Lorry; and through
his absent manner of clasping his head and drearily wandering away
into his own room when they got up-stairs, Mr. Lorry was reminded of
Defarge the wine-shop keeper, and the starlight ride.

"I think," he whispered to Miss Pross, after anxious consideration,
"I think we had best not speak to him just now, or at all disturb him.
I must look in at Tellson's; so I will go there at once and come back
presently.  Then, we will take him a ride into the country, and dine
there, and all will be well."

It was easier for Mr. Lorry to look in at Tellson's, than to look
out of Tellson's.  He was detained two hours.  When he came back,
he ascended the old staircase alone, having asked no question of
the servant; going thus into the Doctor's rooms, he was stopped by
a low sound of knocking.

"Good God!" he said, with a start.  "What's that?"

Miss Pross, with a terrified face, was at his ear.  "O me, O me!
All is lost!" cried she, wringing her hands.  "What is to be told
to Ladybird?  He doesn't know me, and is making shoes!"

Mr. Lorry said what he could to calm her, and went himself into the
Doctor's room.  The bench was turned towards the light, as it had
been when he had seen the shoemaker at his work before, and his head
was bent down, and he was very busy.

"Doctor Manette.  My dear friend, Doctor Manette!"

The Doctor looked at him for a moment--half inquiringly, half as if
he were angry at being spoken to--and bent over his work again.

He had laid aside his coat and waistcoat; his shirt was open at the
throat, as it used to be when he did that work; and even the old
haggard, faded surface of face had come back to him.  He worked hard--
impatiently--as if in some sense of having been interrupted.

Mr. Lorry glanced at the work in his hand, and observed that it was
a shoe of the old size and shape.  He took up another that was lying
by him, and asked what it was.

"A young lady's walking shoe," he muttered, without looking up.
"It ought to have been finished long ago.  Let it be."

"But, Doctor Manette.  Look at me!"

He obeyed, in the old mechanically submissive manner, without
pausing in his work.

"You know me, my dear friend?  Think again.  This is not your proper
occupation.  Think, dear friend!"

Nothing would induce him to speak more.  He looked up, for an instant
at a time, when he was requested to do so; but, no persuasion would
extract a word from him.  He worked, and worked, and worked, in silence,
and words fell on him as they would have fallen on an echoless wall,
or on the air.  The only ray of hope that Mr. Lorry could discover,
was, that he sometimes furtively looked up without being asked.  In that,
there seemed a faint expression of curiosity or perplexity--as though
he were trying to reconcile some doubts in his mind.

Two things at once impressed themselves on Mr. Lorry, as important
above all others; the first, that this must be kept secret from Lucie;
the second, that it must be kept secret from all who knew him.  In
conjunction with Miss Pross, he took immediate steps towards the
latter precaution, by giving out that the Doctor was not well, and
required a few days of complete rest.  In aid of the kind deception
to be practised on his daughter, Miss Pross was to write, describing
his having been called away professionally, and referring to an
imaginary letter of two or three hurried lines in his own hand,
represented to have been addressed to her by the same post.

These measures, advisable to be taken in any case, Mr. Lorry took in
the hope of his coming to himself.  If that should happen soon, he kept
another course in reserve; which was, to have a certain opinion that he
thought the best, on the Doctor's case.

In the hope of his recovery, and of resort to this third course being
thereby rendered practicable, Mr. Lorry resolved to watch him
attentively, with as little appearance as possible of doing so.
He therefore made arrangements to absent himself from Tellson's for the
first time in his life, and took his post by the window in the same room.

He was not long in discovering that it was worse than useless to speak
to him, since, on being pressed, he became worried.  He abandoned that
attempt on the first day, and resolved merely to keep himself always
before him, as a silent protest against the delusion into which he had
fallen, or was failing.  He remained, therefore, in his seat near the
window, reading and writing, and expressing in as many pleasant and
natural ways as he could think of, that it was a free place.

Doctor Manette took what was given him to eat and drink, and worked on,
that first day, until it was too dark to see--worked on, half an hour
after Mr. Lorry could not have seen, for his life, to read or write.
When he put his tools aside as useless, until morning, Mr. Lorry rose
and said to him:

"Will you go out?"

He looked down at the floor on either side of him in the old manner,
looked up in the old manner, and repeated in the old low voice:

"Out?"

"Yes; for a walk with me.  Why not?"

He made no effort to say why not, and said not a word more.  But,
Mr. Lorry thought he saw, as he leaned forward on his bench in the
dusk, with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands, that he
was in some misty way asking himself, "Why not?"  The sagacity of the
man of business perceived an advantage here, and determined to hold it.

Miss Pross and he divided the night into two watches, and observed him
at intervals from the adjoining room.  He paced up and down for a long
time before he lay down; but, when he did finally lay himself down,
he fell asleep.  In the morning, he was up betimes, and went straight
to his bench and to work.

On this second day, Mr. Lorry saluted him cheerfully by his name, and
spoke to him on topics that had been of late familiar to them.  He
returned no reply, but it was evident that he heard what was said,
and that he thought about it, however confusedly.  This encouraged
Mr. Lorry to have Miss Pross in with her work, several times during the
day; at those times, they quietly spoke of Lucie, and of her father then
present, precisely in the usual manner, and as if there were nothing
amiss.  This was done without any demonstrative accompaniment, not long
enough, or often enough to harass him; and it lightened Mr. Lorry's
friendly heart to believe that he looked up oftener, and that he appeared
to be stirred by some perception of inconsistencies surrounding him.

When it fell dark again, Mr. Lorry asked him as before:

"Dear Doctor, will you go out?"

As before, he repeated, "Out?"

"Yes; for a walk with me.  Why not?"

This time, Mr. Lorry feigned to go out when he could extract no answer
from him, and, after remaining absent for an hour, returned.  In the
meanwhile, the Doctor had removed to the seat in the window, and had
sat there looking down at the plane-tree; but, on Mr. Lorry's return,
be slipped away to his bench.

The time went very slowly on, and Mr. Lorry's hope darkened, and his
heart grew heavier again, and grew yet heavier and heavier every day.
The third day came and went, the fourth, the fifth.  Five days, six
days, seven days, eight days, nine days.

With a hope ever darkening, and with a heart always growing heavier
and heavier, Mr. Lorry passed through this anxious time.  The secret
was well kept, and Lucie was unconscious and happy; but he could not
fail to observe that the shoemaker, whose hand had been a little out
at first, was growing dreadfully skilful, and that he had never been
so intent on his work, and that his hands had never been so nimble and
expert, as in the dusk of the ninth evening.



XIX

An Opinion


Worn out by anxious watching, Mr. Lorry fell asleep at his post.  On
the tenth morning of his suspense, he was startled by the shining of
the sun into the room where a heavy slumber had overtaken him when it
was dark night.

He rubbed his eyes and roused himself; but he doubted, when he had
done so, whether he was not still asleep.  For, going to the door of
the Doctor's room and looking in, he perceived that the shoemaker's
bench and tools were put aside again, and that the Doctor himself sat
reading at the window.  He was in his usual morning dress, and his face
(which Mr. Lorry could distinctly see), though still very pale, was
calmly studious and attentive.

Even when he had satisfied himself that he was awake, Mr. Lorry felt
giddily uncertain for some few moments whether the late shoemaking
might not be a disturbed dream of his own; for, did not his eyes show
him his friend before him in his accustomed clothing and aspect, and
employed as usual; and was there any sign within their range, that the
change of which he had so strong an impression had actually happened?

It was but the inquiry of his first confusion and astonishment, the
answer being obvious.  If the impression were not produced by a real
corresponding and sufficient cause, how came he, Jarvis Lorry, there?
How came he to have fallen asleep, in his clothes, on the sofa in
Doctor Manette's consulting-room, and to be debating these points
outside the Doctor's bedroom door in the early morning?

Within a few minutes, Miss Pross stood whispering at his side.  If he
had had any particle of doubt left, her talk would of necessity have
resolved it; but he was by that time clear-headed, and had none.  He
advised that they should let the time go by until the regular
breakfast-hour, and should then meet the Doctor as if nothing unusual
had occurred.  If he appeared to be in his customary state of mind,
Mr. Lorry would then cautiously proceed to seek direction and guidance
from the opinion he had been, in his anxiety, so anxious to obtain.

Miss Pross, submitting herself to his judgment, the scheme was worked
out with care.  Having abundance of time for his usual methodical
toilette, Mr. Lorry presented himself at the breakfast-hour in his
usual white linen, and with his usual neat leg.  The Doctor was
summoned in the usual way, and came to breakfast.

So far as it was possible to comprehend him without overstepping
those delicate and gradual approaches which Mr. Lorry felt to be the
only safe advance, he at first supposed that his daughter's marriage
had taken place yesterday.  An incidental allusion, purposely thrown
out, to the day of the week, and the day of the month, set him thinking
and counting, and evidently made him uneasy.  In all other respects,
however, he was so composedly himself, that Mr. Lorry determined to
have the aid he sought.  And that aid was his own.

Therefore, when the breakfast was done and cleared away, and he and
the Doctor were left together, Mr. Lorry said, feelingly:

"My dear Manette, I am anxious to have your opinion, in confidence,
on a very curious case in which I am deeply interested; that is to say,
it is very curious to me; perhaps, to your better information it may
be less so."

Glancing at his hands, which were discoloured by his late work, the
Doctor looked troubled, and listened attentively.  He had already
glanced at his hands more than once.

"Doctor Manette," said Mr. Lorry, touching him affectionately on the
arm, "the case is the case of a particularly dear friend of mine.
Pray give your mind to it, and advise me well for his sake--and
above all, for his daughter's--his daughter's, my dear Manette."

"If I understand," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, "some mental
shock--?"

"Yes!"

"Be explicit," said the Doctor.  "Spare no detail."

Mr. Lorry saw that they understood one another, and proceeded.

"My dear Manette, it is the case of an old and a prolonged shock, of
great acuteness and severity to the affections, the feelings,
the--the--as you express it--the mind.  The mind.  It is the case of
a shock under which the sufferer was borne down, one cannot say for
how long, because I believe he cannot calculate the time himself, and
there are no other means of getting at it.  It is the case of a shock
from which the sufferer recovered, by a process that he cannot trace
himself--as I once heard him publicly relate in a striking manner.
It is the case of a shock from which he has recovered, so completely,
as to be a highly intelligent man, capable of close application of mind,
and great exertion of body, and of constantly making fresh additions to
his stock of knowledge, which was already very large.  But, unfortunately,
there has been," he paused and took a deep breath--"a slight relapse."

The Doctor, in a low voice, asked, "Of how long duration?"

"Nine days and nights."

"How did it show itself?  I infer," glancing at his hands again,
"in the resumption of some old pursuit connected with the shock?"

"That is the fact."

"Now, did you ever see him," asked the Doctor, distinctly and
collectedly, though in the same low voice, "engaged in that
pursuit originally?"

"Once."

"And when the relapse fell on him, was he in most respects--or in
all respects--as he was then?"

"I think in all respects."

"You spoke of his daughter.  Does his daughter know of the relapse?"

"No.  It has been kept from her, and I hope will always be kept from
her.  It is known only to myself, and to one other who may be trusted."

The Doctor grasped his band, and murmured, "That was very kind.
That was very thoughtful!"  Mr. Lorry grasped his hand in return,
and neither of the two spoke for a little while.

"Now, my dear Manette," said Mr. Lorry, at length, in his most
considerate and most affectionate way, "I am a mere man of business,
and unfit to cope with such intricate and difficult matters.  I do
not possess the kind of information necessary; I do not possess the
kind of intelligence; I want guiding.  There is no man in this world
on whom I could so rely for right guidance, as on you.  Tell me, how
does this relapse come about?  Is there danger of another?  Could a
repetition of it be prevented?  How should a repetition of it be
treated?  How does it come about at all?  What can I do for my friend?
No man ever can have been more desirous in his heart to serve a friend,
than I am to serve mine, if I knew how.

But I don't know how to originate, in such a case.  If your sagacity,
knowledge, and experience, could put me on the right track, I might be
able to do so much; unenlightened and undirected, I can do so little.
Pray discuss it with me; pray enable me to see it a little more clearly,
and teach me how to be a little more useful."

Doctor Manette sat meditating after these earnest words were spoken,
and Mr. Lorry did not press him.

"I think it probable," said the Doctor, breaking silence with an
effort, "that the relapse you have described, my dear friend, was
not quite unforeseen by its subject."

"Was it dreaded by him?" Mr. Lorry ventured to ask.

"Very much."  He said it with an involuntary shudder.

"You have no idea how such an apprehension weighs on the sufferer's
mind, and how difficult--how almost impossible--it is, for him to force
himself to utter a word upon the topic that oppresses him."

"Would he," asked Mr. Lorry, "be sensibly relieved if he could
prevail upon himself to impart that secret brooding to any one,
when it is on him?"

"I think so.  But it is, as I have told you, next to impossible.
I even believe it--in some cases--to be quite impossible."

"Now," said Mr. Lorry, gently laying his hand on the Doctor's arm
again, after a short silence on both sides, "to what would you refer
this attack?  "

"I believe," returned Doctor Manette, "that there had been a strong
and extraordinary revival of the train of thought and remembrance that
was the first cause of the malady.  Some intense associations of a
most distressing nature were vividly recalled, I think.  It is probable
that there had long been a dread lurking in his mind, that those
associations would be recalled--say, under certain circumstances--say,
on a particular occasion.  He tried to prepare himself in vain; perhaps
the effort to prepare himself made him less able to bear it."

"Would he remember what took place in the relapse?" asked Mr. Lorry,
with natural hesitation.

The Doctor looked desolately round the room, shook his head, and
answered, in a low voice, "Not at all."

"Now, as to the future," hinted Mr. Lorry.

"As to the future," said the Doctor, recovering firmness, "I should
have great hope.  As it pleased Heaven in its mercy to restore him so
soon, I should have great hope.  He, yielding under the pressure of a
complicated something, long dreaded and long vaguely foreseen and
contended against, and recovering after the cloud had burst and passed,
I should hope that the worst was over."

"Well, well!  That's good comfort.  I am thankful!" said Mr. Lorry.

"I am thankful!" repeated the Doctor, bending his head with reverence.

"There are two other points," said Mr. Lorry, "on which I am anxious
to be instructed.  I may go on?"

"You cannot do your friend a better service."  The Doctor gave him
his hand.

"To the first, then.  He is of a studious habit, and unusually
energetic; he applies himself with great ardour to the acquisition
of professional knowledge, to the conducting of experiments, to
many things.  Now, does he do too much?"

"I think not.  It may be the character of his mind, to be always in
singular need of occupation.  That may be, in part, natural to it; in
part, the result of affliction.  The less it was occupied with healthy
things, the more it would be in danger of turning in the unhealthy
direction.  He may have observed himself, and made the discovery."

"You are sure that he is not under too great a strain?"

"I think I am quite sure of it."

"My dear Manette, if he were overworked now--"

"My dear Lorry, I doubt if that could easily be.  There has been a
violent stress in one direction, and it needs a counterweight."

"Excuse me, as a persistent man of business.  Assuming for a moment,
that he WAS overworked; it would show itself in some renewal of this disorder?"

"I do not think so.  I do not think," said Doctor Manette with the
firmness of self-conviction, "that anything but the one train of
association would renew it.  I think that, henceforth, nothing but
some extraordinary jarring of that chord could renew it.  After what
has happened, and after his recovery, I find it difficult to imagine
any such violent sounding of that string again.  I trust, and I almost
believe, that the circumstances likely to renew it are exhausted."

He spoke with the diffidence of a man who knew how slight a thing
would overset the delicate organisation of the mind, and yet with the
confidence of a man who had slowly won his assurance out of personal
endurance and distress.  It was not for his friend to abate that
confidence.  He professed himself more relieved and encouraged than he
really was, and approached his second and last point.  He felt it to
be the most difficult of all; but, remembering his old Sunday morning
conversation with Miss Pross, and remembering what he had seen in the
last nine days, he knew that he must face it.

"The occupation resumed under the influence of this passing affliction
so happily recovered from," said Mr. Lorry, clearing his throat, "we will
call--Blacksmith's work, Blacksmith's work.  We will say, to put a case
and for the sake of illustration, that he had been used, in his bad time,
to work at a little forge.  We will say that he was unexpectedly found
at his forge again.  Is it not a pity that he should keep it by him?"

The Doctor shaded his forehead with his hand, and beat his foot nervously
on the ground.

"He has always kept it by him," said Mr. Lorry, with an anxious look
at his friend.  "Now, would it not be better that he should let it go?"

Still, the Doctor, with shaded forehead, beat his foot nervously on
the ground.

"You do not find it easy to advise me?" said Mr. Lorry.  "I quite
understand it to be a nice question.  And yet I think--" And there he
shook his head, and stopped.

"You see," said Doctor Manette, turning to him after an uneasy pause,
"it is very hard to explain, consistently, the innermost workings of
this poor man's mind.  He once yearned so frightfully for that
occupation, and it was so welcome when it came; no doubt it relieved
his pain so much, by substituting the perplexity of the fingers for
the perplexity of the brain, and by substituting, as he became more
practised, the ingenuity of the hands, for the ingenuity of the
mental torture; that he has never been able to bear the thought of
putting it quite out of his reach.  Even now, when I believe he is
more hopeful of himself than he has ever been, and even speaks of
himself with a kind of confidence, the idea that he might need that
old employment, and not find it, gives him a sudden sense of terror,
like that which one may fancy strikes to the heart of a lost child."

He looked like his illustration, as he raised his eyes to
Mr. Lorry's face.

"But may not--mind!  I ask for information, as a plodding man of
business who only deals with such material objects as guineas,
shillings, and bank-notes--may not the retention of the thing involve
the retention of the idea?  If the thing were gone, my dear Manette,
might not the fear go with it?  In short, is it not a concession to
the misgiving, to keep the forge?"

There was another silence.

"You see, too," said the Doctor, tremulously, "it is such an
old companion."

"I would not keep it," said Mr. Lorry, shaking his head; for he gained
in firmness as he saw the Doctor disquieted.  "I would recommend him
to sacrifice it.  I only want your authority.  I am sure it does no
good.  Come!  Give me your authority, like a dear good man.  For his
daughter's sake, my dear Manette!"

Very strange to see what a struggle there was within him!

"In her name, then, let it be done; I sanction it.  But, I would not
take it away while he was present.  Let it be removed when he is not
there; let him miss his old companion after an absence."

Mr. Lorry readily engaged for that, and the conference was ended.
They passed the day in the country, and the Doctor was quite restored.
On the three following days he remained perfectly well, and on the
fourteenth day he went away to join Lucie and her husband.  The
precaution that had been taken to account for his silence, Mr. Lorry
had previously explained to him, and he had written to Lucie in
accordance with it, and she had no suspicions.

On the night of the day on which he left the house, Mr. Lorry went
into his room with a chopper, saw, chisel, and hammer, attended by
Miss Pross carrying a light.  There, with closed doors, and in a
mysterious and guilty manner, Mr. Lorry hacked the shoemaker's bench
to pieces, while Miss Pross held the candle as if she were assisting
at a murder--for which, indeed, in her grimness, she was no unsuitable
figure.  The burning of the body (previously reduced to pieces
convenient for the purpose) was commenced without delay in the kitchen
fire; and the tools, shoes, and leather, were buried in the garden.
So wicked do destruction and secrecy appear to honest minds, that
Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross, while engaged in the commission of their
deed and in the removal of its traces, almost felt, and almost looked,
like accomplices in a horrible crime.



XX

A Plea


When the newly-married pair came home, the first person who appeared,
to offer his congratulations, was Sydney Carton.  They had not been
at home many hours, when he presented himself.  He was not improved in
habits, or in looks, or in manner; but there was a certain rugged air of
fidelity about him, which was new to the observation of Charles Darnay.

He watched his opportunity of taking Darnay aside into a window, and
of speaking to him when no one overheard.

"Mr. Darnay," said Carton, "I wish we might be friends."

"We are already friends, I hope."

"You are good enough to say so, as a fashion of speech; but, I don't
mean any fashion of speech.  Indeed, when I say I wish we might be friends,
I scarcely mean quite that, either."

Charles Darnay--as was natural--asked him, in all good-humour and
good-fellowship, what he did mean?

"Upon my life," said Carton, smiling, "I find that easier to comprehend
in my own mind, than to convey to yours.  However, let me try.  You
remember a certain famous occasion when I was more drunk than--
than usual?"

"I remember a certain famous occasion when you forced me to confess
that you had been drinking."

"I remember it too.  The curse of those occasions is heavy upon me,
for I always remember them.  I hope it may be taken into account one
day, when all days are at an end for me!  Don't be alarmed;
I am not going to preach."

"I am not at all alarmed.  Earnestness in you, is anything but
alarming to me."

"Ah!" said Carton, with a careless wave of his hand, as if he waved
that away.  "On the drunken occasion in question (one of a large number,
as you know), I was insufferable about liking you, and not liking you.
I wish you would forget it."

"I forgot it long ago."

"Fashion of speech again!  But, Mr. Darnay, oblivion is not so easy to
me, as you represent it to be to you.  I have by no means forgotten it,
and a light answer does not help me to forget it."

"If it was a light answer," returned Darnay, "I beg your forgiveness
for it. I had no other object than to turn a slight thing, which,
to my surprise, seems to trouble you too much, aside.  I declare to you,
on the faith of a gentleman, that I have long dismissed it from my mind.
Good Heaven, what was there to dismiss!  Have I had nothing more
important to remember, in the great service you rendered me that day?"

"As to the great service," said Carton, "I am bound to avow to you,
when you speak of it in that way, that it was mere professional
claptrap, I don't know that I cared what became of you, when I
rendered  it.--Mind!  I say when I rendered it; I am speaking of the past."

"You make light of the obligation," returned Darnay, "but I will not
quarrel with YOUR light answer."

"Genuine truth, Mr. Darnay, trust me!  I have gone aside from my
purpose; I was speaking about our being friends.  Now, you know me;
you know I am incapable of all the higher and better flights of men.
If you doubt it, ask Stryver, and he'll tell you so."

"I prefer to form my own opinion, without the aid of his."

"Well!  At any rate you know me as a dissolute dog, who has never
done any good, and never will."

"I don't know that you `never will.'"

"But I do, and you must take my word for it.  Well!  If you could
endure to have such a worthless fellow, and a fellow of such indifferent
reputation, coming and going at odd times, I should ask that I might be
permitted to come and go as a privileged person here; that I might be
regarded as an useless (and I would add, if it were not for the
resemblance I detected between you and me, an unornamental) piece of
furniture, tolerated for its old service, and taken no notice of.
I doubt if I should abuse the permission.  It is a hundred to one
if I should avail myself of it four times in a year.  It would satisfy me,
I dare say, to know that I had it."

"Will you try?"

"That is another way of saying that I am placed on the footing I have
indicated.  I thank you, Darnay.  I may use that freedom with your name?"

"I think so, Carton, by this time."

They shook hands upon it, and Sydney turned away.  Within a minute
afterwards, he was, to all outward appearance, as unsubstantial as ever.

When he was gone, and in the course of an evening passed with Miss Pross,
the Doctor, and Mr. Lorry, Charles Darnay made some mention of this
conversation in general terms, and spoke of Sydney Carton as a problem
of carelessness and recklessness.  He spoke of him, in short, not
bitterly or meaning to bear hard upon him, but as anybody might who
saw him as he showed himself.

He had no idea that this could dwell in the thoughts of his fair young
wife; but, when he afterwards joined her in their own rooms, he found
her waiting for him with the old pretty lifting of the forehead
strongly marked.

"We are thoughtful to-night!" said Darnay, drawing his arm about her.

"Yes, dearest Charles," with her hands on his breast, and the
inquiring and attentive expression fixed upon him; "we are rather
thoughtful to-night, for we have something on our mind to-night."

"What is it, my Lucie?"

"Will you promise not to press one question on me, if I beg you
not to ask it?"

"Will I promise?  What will I not promise to my Love?"

What, indeed, with his hand putting aside the golden hair from the
cheek, and his other hand against the heart that beat for him!

"I think, Charles, poor Mr. Carton deserves more consideration and
respect than you expressed for him to-night."

"Indeed, my own?  Why so?"

"That is what you are not to ask me.  But I think--I know--he does."

"If you know it, it is enough.  What would you have me do, my Life?"

"I would ask you, dearest, to be very generous with him always, and
very lenient on his faults when he is not by.  I would ask you to
believe that he has a heart he very, very seldom reveals, and that there
are deep wounds in it.  My dear, I have seen it bleeding."

"It is a painful reflection to me," said Charles Darnay, quite astounded,
"that I should have done him any wrong.  I never thought this of him."

"My husband, it is so.  I fear he is not to be reclaimed; there is
scarcely a hope that anything in his character or fortunes is reparable
now.  But, I am sure that he is capable of good things, gentle things,
even magnanimous things."

She looked so beautiful in the purity of her faith in this lost man,
that her husband could have looked at her as she was for hours.

"And, O my dearest Love!" she urged, clinging nearer to him, laying
her head upon his breast, and raising her eyes to his, "remember how
strong we are in our happiness, and how weak he is in his misery!"

The supplication touched him home.  "I will always remember it, dear
Heart!  I will remember it as long as I live."

He bent over the golden head, and put the rosy lips to his, and folded
her in his arms.  If one forlorn wanderer then pacing the dark streets,
could have heard her innocent disclosure, and could have seen the drops
of pity kissed away by her husband from the soft blue eyes so loving of
that husband, he might have cried to the night--and the words would not
have parted from his lips for the first time--

"God bless her for her sweet compassion!"



XXI

Echoing Footsteps


A wonderful corner for echoes, it has been remarked, that corner where
the Doctor lived.  Ever busily winding the golden thread which bound
her husband, and her father, and herself, and her old directress and
companion, in a life of quiet bliss, Lucie sat in the still house in the
tranquilly resounding corner, listening to the echoing footsteps of years.

At first, there were times, though she was a perfectly happy young
wife, when her work would slowly fall from her hands, and her eyes
would be dimmed.  For, there was something coming in the echoes,
something light, afar off, and scarcely audible yet, that stirred
her heart too much.  Fluttering hopes and doubts--hopes, of a love as
yet unknown to her:  doubts, of her remaining upon earth, to enjoy that
new delight--divided her breast.  Among the echoes then, there would
arise the sound of footsteps at her own early grave; and thoughts of
the husband who would be left so desolate, and who would mourn for
her so much, swelled to her eyes, and broke like waves.

That time passed, and her little Lucie lay on her bosom.  Then,
among the advancing echoes, there was the tread of her tiny feet and
the sound of her prattling words.  Let greater echoes resound as they
would, the young mother at the cradle side could always hear those
coming.  They came, and the shady house was sunny with a child's laugh,
and the Divine friend of children, to whom in her trouble she had
confided hers, seemed to take her child in his arms, as He took the
child of old, and made it a sacred joy to her.

Ever busily winding the golden thread that bound them all together,
weaving the service of her happy influence through the tissue of all
their lives, and making it predominate nowhere, Lucie heard in the
echoes of years none but friendly and soothing sounds.  Her husband's
step was strong and prosperous among them; her father's firm and equal.
Lo, Miss Pross, in harness of string, awakening the echoes, as an
unruly charger, whip-corrected, snorting and pawing the earth under
the plane-tree in the garden!

Even when there were sounds of sorrow among the rest, they were not
harsh nor cruel.  Even when golden hair, like her own, lay in a halo
on a pillow round the worn face of a little boy, and he said, with a
radiant smile, "Dear papa and mamma, I am very sorry to leave you both,
and to leave my pretty sister; but I am called, and I must go!"
those were not tears all of agony that wetted his young mother's cheek,
as the spirit departed from her embrace that had been entrusted to it.
Suffer them and forbid them not.  They see my Father's face.
O Father, blessed words!

Thus, the rustling of an Angel's wings got blended with the other
echoes, and they were not wholly of earth, but had in them that breath
of Heaven.  Sighs of the winds that blew over a little garden-tomb were
mingled with them also, and both were audible to Lucie, in a hushed
murmur--like the breathing of a summer sea asleep upon a sandy shore
--as the little Lucie, comically studious at the task of the morning,
or dressing a doll at her mother's footstool, chattered in the
tongues of the Two Cities that were blended in her life.

The Echoes rarely answered to the actual tread of Sydney Carton.
Some half-dozen times a year, at most, he claimed his privilege of coming
in uninvited, and would sit among them through the evening, as he had
once done often.  He never came there heated with wine.  And one other
thing regarding him was whispered in the echoes, which has been
whispered by all true echoes for ages and ages.

No man ever really loved a woman, lost her, and knew her with a
blameless though an unchanged mind, when she was a wife and a mother,
but her children had a strange sympathy with him--an instinctive
delicacy of pity for him.  What fine hidden sensibilities are touched
in such a case, no echoes tell; but it is so, and it was so here.
Carton was the first stranger to whom little Lucie held out her chubby
arms, and he kept his place with her as she grew.  The little boy had
spoken of him, almost at the last.  "Poor Carton!  Kiss him for me!"

Mr. Stryver shouldered his way through the law, like some great engine
forcing itself through turbid water, and dragged his useful friend in
his wake, like a boat towed astern.  As the boat so favoured is usually
in a rough plight, and mostly under water, so, Sydney had a swamped life
of it.  But, easy and strong custom, unhappily so much easier and
stronger in him than any stimulating sense of desert or disgrace, made
it the life he was to lead; and he no more thought of emerging from his
state of lion's jackal, than any real jackal may be supposed to think
of rising to be a lion.  Stryver was rich; had married a florid widow
with property and three boys, who had nothing particularly shining about
them but the straight hair of their dumpling heads.

These three young gentlemen, Mr. Stryver, exuding patronage of the most
offensive quality from every pore, had walked before him like three
sheep to the quiet corner in Soho, and had offered as pupils to Lucie's
husband:  delicately saying "Halloa! here are three lumps of bread-and-
cheese towards your matrimonial picnic, Darnay!"  The polite rejection
of the three lumps of bread-and-cheese had quite bloated Mr. Stryver
with indignation, which he afterwards turned to account in the training
of the young gentlemen, by directing them to beware of the pride of
Beggars, like that tutor-fellow.  He was also in the habit of declaiming
to Mrs. Stryver, over his full-bodied wine, on the arts Mrs. Darnay had
once put in practice to "catch" him, and on the diamond-cut-diamond
arts in himself, madam, which had rendered him "not to be caught."
Some of his King's Bench familiars, who were occasionally parties
to the full-bodied wine and the lie, excused him for the latter by saying
that he had told it so often, that he believed it himself--which is
surely such an incorrigible aggravation of an originally bad offence,
as to justify any such offender's being carried off to some suitably
retired spot, and there hanged out of the way.

These were among the echoes to which Lucie, sometimes pensive,
sometimes amused and laughing, listened in the echoing corner, until
her little daughter was six years old.  How near to her heart the echoes
of her child's tread came, and those of her own dear father's, always
active and self-possessed, and those of her dear husband's, need not
be told.  Nor, how the lightest echo of their united home, directed
by herself with such a wise and elegant thrift that it was more
abundant than any waste, was music to her.  Nor, how there were echoes
all about her, sweet in her ears, of the many times her father had
told her that he found her more devoted to him married (if that could be)
than single, and of the many times her husband had said to her that no
cares and duties seemed to divide her love for him or her help to him,
and asked her "What is the magic secret, my darling, of your being
everything to all of us, as if there were only one of us,
yet never seeming to be hurried, or to have too much to do?"

But, there were other echoes, from a distance, that rumbled menacingly
in the corner all through this space of time.  And it was now, about
little Lucie's sixth birthday, that they began to have an awful sound,
as of a great storm in France with a dreadful sea rising.

On a night in mid-July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine,
Mr. Lorry came in late, from Tellson's, and sat himself down by Lucie
and her husband in the dark window.  It was a hot, wild night, and
they were all three reminded of the old Sunday night when they had
looked at the lightning from the same place.

"I began to think," said Mr. Lorry, pushing his brown wig back, "that
I should have to pass the night at Tellson's.  We have been so full of
business all day, that we have not known what to do first, or which
way to turn.  There is such an uneasiness in Paris, that we have
actually a run of confidence upon us!  Our customers over there, seem
not to be able to confide their property to us fast enough.  There is
positively a mania among some of them for sending it to England."

"That has a bad look," said Darnay--

"A bad look, you say, my dear Darnay?  Yes, but we don't know what
reason there is in it.  People are so unreasonable!  Some of us at
Tellson's are getting old, and we really can't be troubled out of
the ordinary course without due occasion."

"Still," said Darnay, "you know how gloomy and threatening the sky is."

"I know that, to be sure," assented Mr. Lorry, trying to persuade
himself that his sweet temper was soured, and that he grumbled,
"but I am determined to be peevish after my long day's botheration.
Where is Manette?"

"Here he is," said the Doctor, entering the dark room at the moment.

"I am quite glad you are at home; for these hurries and forebodings by
which I have been surrounded all day long, have made me nervous
without reason.  You are not going out, I hope?"

"No; I am going to play backgammon with you, if you like,"
said the Doctor.

"I don't think I do like, if I may speak my mind.  I am not fit to
be pitted against you to-night.  Is the teaboard still there, Lucie?
I can't see."

"Of course, it has been kept for you."

"Thank ye, my dear.  The precious child is safe in bed?"

"And sleeping soundly."

"That's right; all safe and well!  I don't know why anything should
be otherwise than safe and well here, thank God; but I have been so
put out all day, and I am not as young as I was!  My tea, my dear!
Thank ye.  Now, come and take your place in the circle, and let us
sit quiet, and hear the echoes about which you have your theory."

"Not a theory; it was a fancy."

"A fancy, then, my wise pet," said Mr. Lorry, patting her hand.  "They
are very numerous and very loud, though, are they not?  Only hear them!"

Headlong, mad, and dangerous footsteps to force their way into anybody's
life, footsteps not easily made clean again if once stained red, the
footsteps raging in Saint Antoine afar off, as the little circle sat
in the dark London window.

Saint Antoine had been, that morning, a vast dusky mass of scarecrows
heaving to and fro, with frequent gleams of light above the billowy
heads, where steel blades and bayonets shone in the sun.  A tremendous
roar arose from the throat of Saint Antoine, and a forest of naked arms
struggled in the air like shrivelled branches of trees in a winter wind:
all the fingers convulsively clutching at every weapon or semblance of
a weapon that was thrown up from the depths below, no matter how far off.

Who gave them out, whence they last came, where they began, through
what agency they crookedly quivered and jerked, scores at a time, over
the heads of the crowd, like a kind of lightning, no eye in the throng
could have told; but, muskets were being distributed--so were
cartridges, powder, and ball, bars of iron and wood, knives, axes,
pikes, every weapon that distracted ingenuity could discover or devise.
People who could lay hold of nothing else, set themselves with bleeding
hands to force stones and bricks out of their places in walls.  Every
pulse and heart in Saint Antoine was on high-fever strain and at
high-fever heat.  Every living creature there held life as of no account,
and was demented with a passionate readiness to sacrifice it.

As a whirlpool of boiling waters has a centre point, so, all this raging
circled round Defarge's wine-shop, and every human drop in the caldron
had a tendency to be sucked towards the vortex where Defarge himself,
already begrimed with gunpowder and sweat, issued orders, issued arms,
thrust this man back, dragged this man forward, disarmed one to arm
another, laboured and strove in the thickest of the uproar.

"Keep near to me, Jacques Three," cried Defarge; "and do you,
Jacques One and Two, separate and put yourselves at the head of
as many of these patriots as you can.  Where is my wife?"

"Eh, well!  Here you see me!" said madame, composed as ever, but not
knitting to-day.  Madame's resolute right hand was occupied with an axe,
in place of the usual softer implements, and in her girdle were a pistol
and a cruel knife.

"Where do you go, my wife?"

"I go," said madame, "with you at present.  You shall see me at the
head of women, by-and-bye."

"Come, then!" cried Defarge, in a resounding voice.  "Patriots and
friends, we are ready!  The Bastille!"

With a roar that sounded as if all the breath in France had been
shaped into the detested word, the living sea rose, wave on wave,
depth on depth, and overflowed the city to that point.  Alarm-bells
ringing, drums beating, the sea raging and thundering on its new beach,
the attack began.

Deep ditches, double drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great
towers, cannon, muskets, fire and smoke.  Through the fire and through
the smoke--in the fire and in the smoke, for the sea cast him up against
a cannon, and on the instant he became a cannonier--Defarge of the
wine-shop worked like a manful soldier, Two fierce hours.

Deep ditch, single drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great towers,
cannon, muskets, fire and smoke.  One drawbridge down!  "Work, comrades
all, work!  Work, Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques One Thousand,
Jacques Two Thousand, Jacques Five-and-Twenty Thousand; in the name of
all the Angels or the Devils--which you prefer--work!"  Thus Defarge
of the wine-shop, still at his gun, which had long gown hot.

"To me, women!" cried madame his wife.  "What!  We can kill as well as
the men when the place is taken!"  And to her, with a shrill thirsty cry,
trooping women variously armed, but all armed age in hunger and revenge.

Cannon, muskets, fire and smoke; but, still the deep ditch, the single
drawbridge, the massive stone wails, and the eight great towers.  Slight
displacements of the raging sea, made by the falling wounded.  Flashing
weapons, blazing torches, smoking waggonloads of wet straw, hard work
at neighbouring barricades in all directions, shrieks, volleys,
execrations, bravery without stint, boom smash and rattle, and the
furious sounding of the living sea; but, still the deep ditch, and the
single drawbridge, and the massive stone walls, and the eight great
towers, and still Defarge of the wine-shop at his gun, grown doubly
hot by the service of Four fierce hours.

A white flag from within the fortress, and a parley--this dimly
perceptible through the raging storm, nothing audible in it--suddenly
the sea rose immeasurably wider and higher, and swept Defarge of the
wine-shop over the lowered drawbridge, past the massive stone outer
walls, in among the eight great towers surrendered!

So resistless was the force of the ocean bearing him on, that even
to draw his breath or turn his head was as impracticable as if he had
been struggling in the surf at the South Sea, until he was landed in
the outer courtyard of the Bastille.  There, against an angle of a
wall, he made a struggle to look about him.  Jacques Three was nearly
at his side; Madame Defarge, still heading some of her women, was
visible in the inner distance, and her knife was in her hand.  Everywhere
was tumult, exultation, deafening and maniacal bewilderment, astounding
noise, yet furious dumb-show.

"The Prisoners!"

"The Records!"

"The secret cells!"

"The instruments of torture!"

"The Prisoners!"

Of all these cries, and ten thousand incoherences, "The Prisoners!"
was the cry most taken up by the sea that rushed in, as if there were
an eternity of people, as well as of time and space.  When the foremost
billows rolled past, bearing the prison officers with them, and
threatening them all with instant death if any secret nook remained
undisclosed, Defarge laid his strong hand on the breast of one of
these men--a man with a grey head, who had a lighted torch in his hand--
separated him from the rest, and got him between himself and the wall.

"Show me the North Tower!" said Defarge.  "Quick!"

"I will faithfully," replied the man, "if you will come with me.  But
there is no one there."

"What is the meaning of One Hundred and Five, North Tower?"
asked Defarge.  "Quick!"

"The meaning, monsieur?"

"Does it mean a captive, or a place of captivity?  Or do you mean that
I shall strike you dead?"

"Kill him!" croaked Jacques Three, who had come close up.

"Monsieur, it is a cell."

"Show it me!"

"Pass this way, then."

Jacques Three, with his usual craving on him, and evidently
disappointed by the dialogue taking a turn that did not seem to promise
bloodshed, held by Defarge's arm as he held by the turnkey's.  Their
three heads had been close together during this brief discourse, and
it had been as much as they could do to hear one another, even then:
so tremendous was the noise of the living ocean, in its irruption into
the Fortress, and its inundation of the courts and passages and
staircases.  All around outside, too, it beat the walls with a deep,
hoarse roar, from which, occasionally, some partial shouts of tumult
broke and leaped into the air like spray.

Through gloomy vaults where the light of day had never shone, past
hideous doors of dark dens and cages, down cavernous flights of steps,
and again up steep rugged ascents of stone and brick, more like dry
waterfalls than staircases, Defarge, the turnkey, and Jacques Three,
linked hand and arm, went with all the speed they could make.  Here
and there, especially at first, the inundation started on them and
swept by; but when they had done descending, and were winding and
climbing up a tower, they were alone.  Hemmed in here by the massive
thickness of walls and arches, the storm within the fortress and without
was only audible to them in a dull, subdued way, as if the noise out of
which they had come had almost destroyed their sense of hearing.

The turnkey stopped at a low door, put a key in a clashing lock,
swung the door slowly open, and said, as they all bent their heads
and passed in:

"One hundred and five, North Tower!"

There was a small, heavily-grated, unglazed window high in the wall,
with a stone screen before it, so that the sky could be only seen by
stooping low and looking up.  There was a small chimney, heavily barred
across, a few feet within.  There was a heap of old feathery wood-ashes
on the hearth.  There was a stool, and table, and a straw bed.  There
were the four blackened walls, and a rusted iron ring in one of them.

"Pass that torch slowly along these walls, that I may see them,"
said Defarge to the turnkey.

The man obeyed, and Defarge followed the light closely with his eyes.

"Stop!--Look here, Jacques!"

"A. M.!" croaked Jacques Three, as he read greedily.

"Alexandre Manette," said Defarge in his ear, following the letters
with his swart forefinger, deeply engrained with gunpowder.  "And here
he wrote `a poor physician.' And it was he, without doubt, who scratched
a calendar on this stone.  What is that in your hand?  A crowbar?
Give it me!"

He had still the linstock of his gun in his own hand.  He made a
sudden exchange of the two instruments, and turning on the worm-eaten
stool and table, beat them to pieces in a few blows.

"Hold the light higher!" he said, wrathfully, to the turnkey.
"Look among those fragments with care, Jacques.  And see!  Here is my knife,"
throwing it to him; "rip open that bed, and search the straw.
Hold the light higher, you!"

With a menacing look at the turnkey he crawled upon the hearth,
and, peering up the chimney, struck and prised at its sides with the
crowbar, and worked at the iron grating across it.  In a few minutes,
some mortar and dust came dropping down, which he averted his face to
avoid; and in it, and in the old wood-ashes, and in a crevice in the
chimney into which his weapon had slipped or wrought itself, he groped
with a cautious touch.

"Nothing in the wood, and nothing in the straw, Jacques?"

"Nothing."

"Let us collect them together, in the middle of the cell.  So!
Light them, you!"

The turnkey fired the little pile, which blazed high and hot.  Stooping
again to come out at the low-arched door, they left it burning, and
retraced their way to the courtyard; seeming to recover their sense of
hearing as they came down, until they were in the raging flood once more.

They found it surging and tossing, in quest of Defarge himself.
Saint Antoine was clamorous to have its wine-shop keeper foremost in
the guard upon the governor who had defended the Bastille and shot the
people.  Otherwise, the governor would not be marched to the Hotel de
Ville for judgment.  Otherwise, the governor would escape, and the
people's blood (suddenly of some value, after many years of
worthlessness) be unavenged.

In the howling universe of passion and contention that seemed to
encompass this grim old officer conspicuous in his grey coat and red
decoration, there was but one quite steady figure, and that was a
woman's.  "See, there is my husband!" she cried, pointing him out.
"See Defarge!"  She stood immovable close to the grain old officer,
and remained immovable close to him; remained immovable close to him
through the streets, as Defarge and the rest bore him along; remained
immovable close to him when he was got near his destination, and began
to be struck at from behind; remained immovable close to him when the
long-gathering rain of stabs and blows fell heavy; was so close to him
when he dropped dead under it, that, suddenly animated, she put her foot
upon his neck, and with her cruel knife--long ready--hewed off his head.

The hour was come, when Saint Antoine was to execute his horrible idea
of hoisting up men for lamps to show what he could be and do.  Saint
Antoine's blood was up, and the blood of tyranny and domination by
the iron hand was down--down on the steps of the Hotel de Ville where
the governor's body lay--down on the sole of the shoe of Madame Defarge
where she had trodden on the body to steady it for mutilation.
"Lower the lamp yonder!" cried Saint Antoine, after glaring round for a
new means of death; "here is one of his soldiers to be left on guard!"
The swinging sentinel was posted, and the sea rushed on.

The sea of black and threatening waters, and of destructive upheaving
of wave against wave, whose depths were yet unfathomed and whose
forces were yet unknown.  The remorseless sea of turbulently swaying
shapes, voices of vengeance, and faces hardened in the furnaces of
suffering until the touch of pity could make no mark on them.

But, in the ocean of faces where every fierce and furious expression
was in vivid life, there were two groups of faces--each seven in number
--so fixedly contrasting with the rest, that never did sea roll which
bore more memorable wrecks with it.  Seven faces of prisoners, suddenly
released by the storm that had burst their tomb, were carried high
overhead:  all scared, all lost, all wondering and amazed, as if the
Last Day were come, and those who rejoiced around them were lost spirits.
Other seven faces there were, carried higher, seven dead faces, whose
drooping eyelids and half-seen eyes awaited the Last Day.  Impassive
faces, yet with a suspended--not an abolished--expression on them; faces,
rather, in a fearful pause, as having yet to raise the dropped lids of
the eyes, and bear witness with the bloodless lips, "THOU DIDST IT!"

Seven prisoners released, seven gory heads on pikes, the keys of the
accursed fortress of the eight strong towers, some discovered letters
and other memorials of prisoners of old time, long dead of broken
hearts,--such, and such--like, the loudly echoing footsteps of Saint
Antoine escort through the Paris streets in mid-July, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-nine.  Now, Heaven defeat the fancy of Lucie Darnay,
and keep these feet far out of her life!  For, they are headlong, mad,
and dangerous; and in the years so long after the breaking of the cask
at Defarge's wine-shop door, they are not easily purified when once
stained red.



XXII

The Sea Still Rises


Haggard Saint Antoine had had only one exultant week, in which to
soften his modicum of hard and bitter bread to such extent as he
could, with the relish of fraternal embraces and congratulations,
when Madame Defarge sat at her counter, as usual, presiding over the
customers. Madame Defarge wore no rose in her head, for the great
brotherhood of Spies had become, even in one short week, extremely
chary of trusting themselves to the saint's mercies.  The lamps across
his streets had a portentously elastic swing with them.

Madame Defarge, with her arms folded, sat in the morning light and heat,
contemplating the wine-shop and the street.  In both, there were several
knots of loungers, squalid and miserable, but now with a manifest sense
of power enthroned on their distress.  The raggedest nightcap, awry on
the wretchedest head, had this crooked significance in it:  "I know how
hard it has grown for me, the wearer of this, to support life in myself;
but do you know how easy it has grown for me, the wearer of this, to
destroy life in you?"  Every lean bare arm, that bad been without work
before, had this work always ready for it now, that it could strike.
The fingers of the knitting women were vicious, with the experience that
they could tear.  There was a change in the appearance of Saint Antoine;
the image had been hammering into this for hundreds of years, and the
last finishing blows had told mightily on the expression.

Madame Defarge sat observing it, with such suppressed approval as was
to be desired in the leader of the Saint Antoine women.  One of her
sisterhood knitted beside her.  The short, rather plump wife of a
starved grocer, and the mother of two children withal, this lieutenant
had already earned the complimentary name of The Vengeance.

"Hark!" said The Vengeance.  "Listen, then!  Who comes?"

As if a train of powder laid from the outermost bound of Saint Antoine
Quarter to the wine-shop door, had been suddenly fired, a fast-spreading
murmur came rushing along.

"It is Defarge," said madame.  "Silence, patriots!"

Defarge came in breathless, pulled off a red cap he wore, and looked
around him!  "Listen, everywhere!" said madame again.  "Listen to him!"
Defarge stood, panting, against a background of eager eyes and open
mouths, formed outside the door; all those within the wine-shop had
sprung to their feet.

"Say then, my husband.  What is it?"

"News from the other world!"

"How, then?" cried madame, contemptuously.  "The other world?"

"Does everybody here recall old Foulon, who told the famished people
that they might eat grass, and who died, and went to Hell?"

"Everybody!" from all throats.

"The news is of him.  He is among us!"

"Among us!" from the universal throat again.  "And dead?"

"Not dead!  He feared us so much--and with reason--that he caused
himself to be represented as dead, and had a grand mock-funeral.  But
they have found him alive, hiding in the country, and have brought him
in.  I have seen him but now, on his way to the Hotel de Ville, a
prisoner.  I have said that he had reason to fear us.  Say all!
HAD he reason?"

Wretched old sinner of more than threescore years and ten, if he had
never known it yet, he would have known it in his heart of hearts if
he could have heard the answering cry.

A moment of profound silence followed.  Defarge and his wife looked
steadfastly at one another.  The Vengeance stooped, and the jar of
a drum was heard as she moved it at her feet behind the counter.

"Patriots!" said Defarge, in a determined voice, "are we ready?"

Instantly Madame Defarge's knife was in her girdle; the drum was beating
in the streets, as if it and a drummer had flown together by magic; and
The Vengeance, uttering terrific shrieks, and flinging her arms about
her head like all the forty Furies at once, was tearing from house to
house, rousing the women.

The men were terrible, in the bloody-minded anger with which they looked
from windows, caught up what arms they had, and came pouring down into
the streets; but, the women were a sight to chill the boldest.  From
such household occupations as their bare poverty yielded, from their
children, from their aged and their sick crouching on the bare ground
famished and naked, they ran out with streaming hair, urging one
another, and themselves, to madness with the wildest cries and actions.
Villain Foulon taken, my sister!  Old Foulon taken, my mother!
Miscreant Foulon taken, my daughter!  Then, a score of others ran into
the midst of these, beating their breasts, tearing their hair, and
screaming, Foulon alive!  Foulon who told the starving people they
might eat grass!  Foulon who told my old father that he might eat
grass, when I had no bread to give him!  Foulon who told my baby it
might suck grass, when these breasts where dry with want!  O mother
of God, this Foulon!  O Heaven our suffering!  Hear me, my dead baby
and my withered father:  I swear on my knees, on these stones, to avenge
you on Foulon!  Husbands, and brothers, and young men, Give us the blood
of Foulon, Give us the head of Foulon, Give us the heart of Foulon,
Give us the body and soul of Foulon, Rend Foulon to pieces, and dig
him into the ground, that grass may grow from him!  With these cries,
numbers of the women, lashed into blind frenzy, whirled about, striking
and tearing at their own friends until they dropped into a passionate
swoon, and were only saved by the men belonging to them from being
trampled under foot.

Nevertheless, not a moment was lost; not a moment!  This Foulon was
at the Hotel de Ville, and might be loosed.  Never, if Saint Antoine
knew his own sufferings, insults, and wrongs!  Armed men and women
flocked out of the Quarter so fast, and drew even these last dregs
after them with such a force of suction, that within a quarter of an
hour there was not a human creature in Saint Antoine's bosom but a
few old crones and the wailing children.

No. They were all by that time choking the Hall of Examination where
this old man, ugly and wicked, was, and overflowing into the adjacent
open space and streets.  The Defarges, husband and wife, The Vengeance,
and Jacques Three, were in the first press, and at no great distance
from him in the Hall.

"See!" cried madame, pointing with her knife.  "See the old villain
bound with ropes.  That was well done to tie a bunch of grass upon
his back.  Ha, ha!  That was well done.  Let him eat it now!"  Madame
put her knife under her arm, and clapped her hands as at a play.

The people immediately behind Madame Defarge, explaining the cause of
her satisfaction to those behind them, and those again explaining
to others, and those to others, the neighbouring streets resounded with
the clapping of hands.  Similarly, during two or three hours of drawl,
and the winnowing of many bushels of words, Madame Defarge's frequent
expressions of impatience were taken up, with marvellous quickness,
at a distance:  the more readily, because certain men who had by some
wonderful exercise of agility climbed up the external architecture to
look in from the windows, knew Madame Defarge well, and acted as a
telegraph between her and the crowd outside the building.

At length the sun rose so high that it struck a kindly ray as of hope
or protection, directly down upon the old prisoner's head.  The favour
was too much to bear; in an instant the barrier of dust and chaff that
had stood surprisingly long, went to the winds, and Saint Antoine had
got him!

It was known directly, to the furthest confines of the crowd.  Defarge
had but sprung over a railing and a table, and folded the miserable
wretch in a deadly embrace--Madame Defarge had but followed and turned
her hand in one of the ropes with which he was tied--The Vengeance
and Jacques Three were not yet up with them, and the men at the windows
had not yet swooped into the Hall, like birds of prey from their high
perches--when the cry seemed to go up, all over the city, "Bring him
out!  Bring him to the lamp!"

Down, and up, and head foremost on the steps of the building; now, on
his knees; now, on his feet; now, on his back; dragged, and struck at,
and stifled by the bunches of grass and straw that were thrust into his
face by hundreds of hands; torn, bruised, panting, bleeding, yet always
entreating and beseeching for mercy; now full of vehement agony of
action, with a small clear space about him as the people drew one
another back that they might see; now, a log of dead wood drawn through
a forest of legs; he was hauled to the nearest street corner where one
of the fatal lamps swung, and there Madame Defarge let him go--as a
cat might have done to a mouse--and silently and composedly looked
at him while they made ready, and while he besought her:  the women
passionately screeching at him all the time, and the men sternly
calling out to have him killed with grass in his mouth.  Once, he went
aloft, and the rope broke, and they caught him shrieking; twice, he went
aloft, and the rope broke, and they caught him shrieking; then, the rope
was merciful, and held him, and his head was soon upon a pike, with
grass enough in the mouth for all Saint Antoine to dance at the sight of.

Nor was this the end of the day's bad work, for Saint Antoine so
shouted and danced his angry blood up, that it boiled again, on
hearing when the day closed in that the son-in-law of the despatched,
another of the people's enemies and insulters, was coming into Paris
under a guard five hundred strong, in cavalry alone.  Saint Antoine
wrote his crimes on flaring sheets of paper, seized him--would have
torn him out of the breast of an army to bear Foulon company--set
his head and heart on pikes, and carried the three spoils of the day,
in Wolf-procession through the streets.

Not before dark night did the men and women come back to the children,
wailing and breadless.  Then, the miserable bakers' shops were beset
by long files of them, patiently waiting to buy bad bread; and while
they waited with stomachs faint and empty, they beguiled the time by
embracing one another on the triumphs of the day, and achieving them
again in gossip.  Gradually, these strings of ragged people shortened
and frayed away; and then poor lights began to shine in high windows,
and slender fires were made in the streets, at which neighbours cooked
in common, afterwards supping at their doors.

Scanty and insufficient suppers those, and innocent of meat, as of
most other sauce to wretched bread.  Yet, human fellowship infused
some nourishment into the flinty viands, and struck some sparks of
cheerfulness out of them.  Fathers and mothers who had had their full
share in the worst of the day, played gently with their meagre
children; and lovers, with such a world around them and before them,
loved and hoped.

It was almost morning, when Defarge's wine-shop parted with its last
knot of customers, and Monsieur Defarge said to madame his wife, in
husky tones, while fastening the door:

"At last it is come, my dear!"

"Eh well!" returned madame.  "Almost."

Saint Antoine slept, the Defarges slept:  even The Vengeance slept with
her starved grocer, and the drum was at rest.  The drum's was the only
voice in Saint Antoine that blood and hurry had not changed.  The
Vengeance, as custodian of the drum, could have wakened him up and had
the same speech out of him as before the Bastille fell, or old Foulon
was seized; not so with the hoarse tones of the men and women in Saint
Antoine's bosom.



XXIII

Fire Rises


There was a change on the village where the fountain fell, and where
the mender of roads went forth daily to hammer out of the stones on
the highway such morsels of bread as might serve for patches to hold
his poor ignorant soul and his poor reduced body together.  The prison
on the crag was not so dominant as of yore; there were soldiers to guard
it, but not many; there were officers to guard the soldiers, but not
one of them knew what his men would do--beyond this:  that it would
probably not be what he was ordered.

Far and wide lay a ruined country, yielding nothing but desolation.
Every green leaf, every blade of grass and blade of grain, was as
shrivelled and poor as the miserable people.  Everything was bowed
down, dejected, oppressed, and broken.  Habitations, fences,
domesticated animals, men, women, children, and the soil that bore
them--all worn out.

Monseigneur (often a most worthy individual gentleman) was a national
blessing, gave a chivalrous tone to things, was a polite example of
luxurious and shining fife, and a great deal more to equal purpose;
nevertheless, Monseigneur as a class had, somehow or other, brought
things to this.  Strange that Creation, designed expressly for
Monseigneur, should be so soon wrung dry and squeezed out!  There must
be something short-sighted in the eternal arrangements, surely!  Thus
it was, however; and the last drop of blood having been extracted from
the flints, and the last screw of the rack having been turned so often
that its purchase crumbled, and it now turned and turned with nothing
to bite, Monseigneur began to run away from a phenomenon so low
and unaccountable.

But, this was not the change on the village, and on many a village
like it.  For scores of years gone by, Monseigneur had squeezed it
and wrung it, and had seldom graced it with his presence except for
the pleasures of the chase--now, found in hunting the people; now,
found in hunting the beasts, for whose preservation Monseigneur made
edifying spaces of barbarous and barren wilderness.  No.  The change
consisted in the appearance of strange faces of low caste, rather than
in the disappearance of the high caste, chiselled, and otherwise
beautified and beautifying features of Monseigneur.

For, in these times, as the mender of roads worked, solitary, in the
dust, not often troubling himself to reflect that dust he was and to
dust he must return, being for the most part too much occupied in
thinking how little he had for supper and how much more he would eat
if he had it--in these times, as he raised his eyes from his lonely
labour, and viewed the prospect, he would see some rough figure
approaching on foot, the like of which was once a rarity in those
parts, but was now a frequent presence.  As it advanced, the mender
of roads would discern without surprise, that it was a shaggy-haired
man, of almost barbarian aspect, tall, in wooden shoes that were
clumsy even to the eyes of a mender of roads, grim, rough, swart,
steeped in the mud and dust of many highways, dank with the marshy
moisture of many low grounds, sprinkled with the thorns and leaves
and moss of many byways through woods.

Such a man came upon him, like a ghost, at noon in the July weather,
as he sat on his heap of stones under a bank, taking such shelter as
he could get from a shower of hail.

The man looked at him, looked at the village in the hollow, at the
mill, and at the prison on the crag.  When he had identified these
objects in what benighted mind he had, he said, in a dialect that
was just intelligible:

"How goes it, Jacques?"

"All well, Jacques."

"Touch then!"

They joined hands, and the man sat down on the heap of stones.

"No dinner?"

"Nothing but supper now," said the mender of roads, with a hungry face.

"It is the fashion," growled the man.  "I meet no dinner anywhere."

He took out a blackened pipe, filled it, lighted it with flint and
steel, pulled at it until it was in a bright glow:  then, suddenly held
it from him and dropped something into it from between his finger and
thumb, that blazed and went out in a puff of smoke.

"Touch then."  It was the turn of the mender of roads to say it this
time, after observing these operations.  They again joined hands.

"To-night?" said the mender of roads.

"To-night," said the man, putting the pipe in his mouth.

"Where?"

"Here."

He and the mender of roads sat on the heap of stones looking silently
at one another, with the hail driving in between them like a pigmy
charge of bayonets, until the sky began to clear over the village.

"Show me!" said the traveller then, moving to the brow of the hill.

"See!" returned the mender of roads, with extended finger.  "You go
down here, and straight through the street, and past the fountain--"

"To the Devil with all that!" interrupted the other, rolling his eye
over the landscape.  "_I_ go through no streets and past no fountains.
Well?"

"Well!  About two leagues beyond the summit of that hill above
the village."

"Good.  When do you cease to work?"

"At sunset."

"Will you wake me, before departing?  I have walked two nights without
resting.  Let me finish my pipe, and I shall sleep like a child.  Will
you wake me?"

"Surely."

The wayfarer smoked his pipe out, put it in his breast, slipped off
his great wooden shoes, and lay down on his back on the heap of stones.
He was fast asleep directly.

As the road-mender plied his dusty labour, and the hail-clouds, rolling
away, revealed bright bars and streaks of sky which were responded to
by silver gleams upon the landscape, the little man (who wore a red cap
now, in place of his blue one) seemed fascinated by the figure on the
heap of stones.  His eyes were so often turned towards it, that he
used his tools mechanically, and, one would have said, to very poor
account.  The bronze face, the shaggy black hair and beard, the coarse
woollen red cap, the rough medley dress of home-spun stuff and hairy
skins of beasts, the powerful frame attenuated by spare living, and
the sullen and desperate compression of the lips in sleep, inspired
the mender of roads with awe.  The traveller had travelled far, and
his feet were footsore, and his ankles chafed and bleeding; his great
shoes, stuffed with leaves and grass, had been heavy to drag over the
many long leagues, and his clothes were chafed into holes, as he himself
was into sores.  Stooping down beside him, the road-mender tried to
get a peep at secret weapons in his breast or where not; but, in vain,
for he slept with his arms crossed upon him, and set as resolutely as
his lips.  Fortified towns with their stockades, guard-houses, gates,
trenches, and drawbridges, seemed to the mender of roads, to be so much
air as against this figure.  And when he lifted his eyes from it to
the horizon and looked around, he saw in his small fancy similar figures,
stopped by no obstacle, tending to centres all over France.

The man slept on, indifferent to showers of hail and intervals of
brightness, to sunshine on his face and shadow, to the paltering lumps
of dull ice on his body and the diamonds into which the sun changed
them, until the sun was low in the west, and the sky was glowing.
Then, the mender of roads having got his tools together and all things
ready to go down into the village, roused him.

"Good!" said the sleeper, rising on his elbow.  "Two leagues beyond
the summit of the hill?"

"About."

"About.  Good!"

The mender of roads went home, with the dust going on before him
according to the set of the wind, and was soon at the fountain,
squeezing himself in among the lean kine brought there to drink, and
appearing even to whisper to them in his whispering to all the village.
When the village had taken its poor supper, it did not creep to bed,
as it usually did, but came out of doors again, and remained there.
A curious contagion of whispering was upon it, and also, when it
gathered together at the fountain in the dark, another curious contagion
of looking expectantly at the sky in one direction only.  Monsieur
Gabelle, chief functionary of the place, became uneasy; went out on
his house-top alone, and looked in that direction too; glanced down
from behind his chimneys at the darkening faces by the fountain below,
and sent word to the sacristan who kept the keys of the church, that
there might be need to ring the tocsin by-and-bye.

The night deepened.  The trees environing the old chateau, keeping
its solitary state apart, moved in a rising wind, as though they
threatened the pile of building massive and dark in the gloom.  Up
the two terrace flights of steps the rain ran wildly, and beat at
the great door, like a swift messenger rousing those within; uneasy
rushes of wind went through the hall, among the old spears and knives,
and passed lamenting up the stairs, and shook the curtains of the bed
where the last Marquis had slept.  East, West, North, and South, through
the woods, four heavy-treading, unkempt figures crushed the high grass
and cracked the branches, striding on cautiously to come together in
the courtyard.  Four lights broke out there, and moved away in different
directions, and all was black again.

But, not for long.  Presently, the chateau began to make itself
strangely visible by some light of its own, as though it were growing
luminous.  Then, a flickering streak played behind the architecture
of the front, picking out transparent places, and showing where
balustrades, arches, and windows were.  Then it soared higher, and
grew broader and brighter.  Soon, from a score of the great windows,
flames burst forth, and the stone faces awakened, stared out of fire.

A faint murmur arose about the house from the few people who were left
there, and there was a saddling of a horse and riding away.  There was
spurring and splashing through the darkness, and bridle was drawn in
the space by the village fountain, and the horse in a foam stood at
Monsieur Gabelle's door.  "Help, Gabelle!  Help, every one!"  The
tocsin rang impatiently, but other help (if that were any) there was
none.  The mender of roads, and two hundred and fifty particular
friends, stood with folded arms at the fountain, looking at the pillar
of fire in the sky.  "It must be forty feet high," said they, grimly;
and never moved.

The rider from the chateau, and the horse in a foam, clattered away
through the village, and galloped up the stony steep, to the prison
on the crag.  At the gate, a group of officers were looking at the
fire; removed from them, a group of soldiers.  "Help, gentlemen--
officers!  The chateau is on fire; valuable objects may be saved from
the flames by timely aid!  Help, help!"  The officers looked towards
the soldiers who looked at the fire; gave no orders; and answered,
with shrugs and biting of lips, "It must burn."

As the rider rattled down the hill again and through the street, the
village was illuminating.  The mender of roads, and the two hundred
and fifty particular friends, inspired as one man and woman by the
idea of lighting up, had darted into their houses, and were putting
candles in every dull little pane of glass.  The general scarcity of
everything, occasioned candles to be borrowed in a rather peremptory
manner of Monsieur Gabelle; and in a moment of reluctance and hesitation
on that functionary's part, the mender of roads, once so submissive
to authority, had remarked that carriages were good to make bonfires
with, and that post-horses would roast.

The chateau was left to itself to flame and burn.  In the roaring and
raging of the conflagration, a red-hot wind, driving straight from
the infernal regions, seemed to be blowing the edifice away.  With the
rising and falling of the blaze, the stone faces showed as if they were
in torment.  When great masses of stone and timber fell, the face with
the two dints in the nose became obscured:  anon struggled out of the
smoke again, as if it were the face of the cruel Marquis, burning at
the stake and contending with the fire.

The chateau burned; the nearest trees, laid hold of by the fire,
scorched and shrivelled; trees at a distance, fired by the four fierce
figures, begirt the blazing edifice with a new forest of smoke.  Molten
lead and iron boiled in the marble basin of the fountain; the water
ran dry; the extinguisher tops of the towers vanished like ice before
the heat, and trickled down into four rugged wells of flame.  Great
rents and splits branched out in the solid walls, like crystallisation;
stupefied birds wheeled about and dropped into the furnace; four fierce
figures trudged away, East, West, North, and South, along the night-
enshrouded roads, guided by the beacon they had lighted, towards their
next destination.  The illuminated village had seized hold of the
tocsin, and, abolishing the lawful ringer, rang for joy.

Not only that; but the village, light-headed with famine, fire, and
bell-ringing, and bethinking itself that Monsieur Gabelle had to do
with the collection of rent and taxes--though it was but a small
instalment of taxes, and no rent at all, that Gabelle had got in those
latter days--became impatient for an interview with him, and,
surrounding his house, summoned him to come forth for personal conference.
Whereupon, Monsieur Gabelle did heavily bar his door, and retire to
hold counsel with himself.  The result of that conference was, that
Gabelle again withdrew himself to his housetop behind his stack of
chimneys; this time resolved, if his door were broken in (he was a
small Southern man of retaliative temperament), to pitch himself head
foremost over the parapet, and crush a man or two below.

Probably, Monsieur Gabelle passed a long night up there, with the
distant chateau for fire and candle, and the beating at his door,
combined with the joy-ringing, for music; not to mention his having
an ill-omened lamp slung across the road before his posting-house gate,
which the village showed a lively inclination to displace in his favour.
A trying suspense, to be passing a whole summer night on the brink of
the black ocean, ready to take that plunge into it upon which Monsieur
Gabelle had resolved!  But, the friendly dawn appearing at last, and
the rush-candles of the village guttering out, the people happily
dispersed, and Monsieur Gabelle came down bringing his life with him
for that while.

Within a hundred miles, and in the light of other fires, there were
other functionaries less fortunate, that night and other nights, whom
the rising sun found hanging across once-peaceful streets, where they
had been born and bred; also, there were other villagers and townspeople
less fortunate than the mender of roads and his fellows, upon whom
the functionaries and soldiery turned with success, and whom they
strung up in their turn.  But, the fierce figures were steadily wending
East, West, North, and South, be that as it would; and whosoever hung,
fire burned.  The altitude of the gallows that would turn to water
and quench it, no functionary, by any stretch of mathematics, was
able to calculate successfully.



XXIV

Drawn to the Loadstone Rock


In such risings of fire and risings of sea--the firm earth shaken by
the rushes of an angry ocean which had now no ebb, but was always on
the flow, higher and higher, to the terror and wonder of the beholders
on the shore--three years of tempest were consumed.  Three more
birthdays of little Lucie had been woven by the golden thread into
the peaceful tissue of the life of her home.

Many a night and many a day had its inmates listened to the echoes in
the corner, with hearts that failed them when they heard the thronging
feet.  For, the footsteps had become to their minds as the footsteps
of a people, tumultuous under a red flag and with their country declared
in danger, changed into wild beasts, by terrible enchantment long
persisted in.

Monseigneur, as a class, had dissociated himself from the phenomenon
of his not being appreciated:  of his being so little wanted in France,
as to incur considerable danger of receiving his dismissal from it,
and this life together.  Like the fabled rustic who raised the Devil
with infinite pains, and was so terrified at the sight of him that he
could ask the Enemy no question, but immediately fled; so, Monseigneur,
after boldly reading the Lord's Prayer backwards for a great number of
years, and performing many other potent spells for compelling the Evil
One, no sooner beheld him in his terrors than he took to his noble heels.

The shining Bull's Eye of the Court was gone, or it would have been
the mark for a hurricane of national bullets.  It had never been a
good eye to see with--had long had the mote in it of Lucifer's pride,
Sardana--palus's luxury, and a mole's blindness--but it had dropped
out and was gone.  The Court, from that exclusive inner circle to its
outermost rotten ring of intrigue, corruption, and dissimulation, was
all gone together.  Royalty was gone; had been besieged in its Palace
and "suspended," when the last tidings came over.

The August of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two was
come, and Monseigneur was by this time scattered far and wide.

As was natural, the head-quarters and great gathering-place of
Monseigneur, in London, was Tellson's Bank.  Spirits are supposed to
haunt the places where their bodies most resorted, and Monseigneur
without a guinea haunted the spot where his guineas used to be.
Moreover, it was the spot to which such French intelligence as was
most to be relied upon, came quickest.  Again:  Tellson's was a
munificent house, and extended great liberality to old customers who
had fallen from their high estate.  Again:  those nobles who had seen
the coming storm in time, and anticipating plunder or confiscation,
had made provident remittances to Tellson's, were always to be heard
of there by their needy brethren.  To which it must be added that every
new-comer from France reported himself and his tidings at Tellson's,
almost as a matter of course.  For such variety of reasons, Tellson's
was at that time, as to French intelligence, a kind of High Exchange;
and this was so well known to the public, and the inquiries made there
were in consequence so numerous, that Tellson's sometimes wrote the
latest news out in a line or so and posted it in the Bank windows,
for all who ran through Temple Bar to read.

On a steaming, misty afternoon, Mr. Lorry sat at his desk, and Charles
Darnay stood leaning on it, talking with him in a low voice.  The
penitential den once set apart for interviews with the House, was now
the news-Exchange, and was filled to overflowing.  It was within half
an hour or so of the time of closing.

"But, although you are the youngest man that ever lived," said Charles
Darnay, rather hesitating, "I must still suggest to you--"

"I understand.  That I am too old?" said Mr. Lorry.

"Unsettled weather, a long journey, uncertain means of travelling, a
disorganised country, a city that may not be even safe for you."

"My dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, "you
touch some of the reasons for my going:  not for my staying away.
It is safe enough for me; nobody will care to interfere with an old
fellow of hard upon fourscore when there are so many people there
much better worth interfering with.  As to its being a disorganised
city, if it were not a disorganised city there would be no occasion
to send somebody from our House here to our House there, who knows
the city and the business, of old, and is in Tellson's confidence.
As to the uncertain travelling, the long journey, and the winter
weather, if I were not prepared to submit myself to a few inconveniences
for the sake of Tellson's, after all these years, who ought to be?"

"I wish I were going myself," said Charles Darnay, somewhat restlessly,
and like one thinking aloud.

"Indeed!  You are a pretty fellow to object and advise!" exclaimed
Mr. Lorry.  "You wish you were going yourself?  And you a Frenchman
born?  You are a wise counsellor."

"My dear Mr. Lorry, it is because I am a Frenchman born, that the
thought (which I did not mean to utter here, however) has passed
through my mind often.  One cannot help thinking, having had some
sympathy for the miserable people, and having abandoned something to
them," he spoke here in his former thoughtful manner, "that one might
be listened to, and might have the power to persuade to some restraint.
Only last night, after you had left us, when I was talking to Lucie--"

"When you were talking to Lucie," Mr. Lorry repeated.  "Yes.  I wonder
you are not ashamed to mention the name of Lucie!  Wishing you were
going to France at this time of day!"

"However, I am not going," said Charles Darnay, with a smile.  "It is
more to the purpose that you say you are."

"And I am, in plain reality.  The truth is, my dear Charles," Mr. Lorry
glanced at the distant House, and lowered his voice, "you can have no
conception of the difficulty with which our business is transacted,
and of the peril in which our books and papers over yonder are involved.
The Lord above knows what the compromising consequences would be to
numbers of people, if some of our documents were seized or destroyed;
and they might be, at any time, you know, for who can say that Paris
is not set afire to-day, or sacked to-morrow!  Now, a judicious selection
from these with the least possible delay, and the burying of them,
or otherwise getting of them out of harm's way, is within the power
(without loss of precious time) of scarcely any one but myself,
if any one.  And shall I hang back, when Tellson's knows this and says
this--Tellson's, whose bread I have eaten these sixty years--because
I am a little stiff about the joints?  Why, I am a boy, sir, to half
a dozen old codgers here!"

"How I admire the gallantry of your youthful spirit, Mr. Lorry."

"Tut!  Nonsense, sir!--And, my dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, glancing
at the House again, "you are to remember, that getting things out of
Paris at this present time, no matter what things, is next to an
impossibility.  Papers and precious matters were this very day brought
to us here (I speak in strict confidence; it is not business-like to
whisper it, even to you), by the strangest bearers you can imagine,
every one of whom had his head hanging on by a single hair as he
passed the Barriers.  At another time, our parcels would come and go,
as easily as in business-like Old England; but now, everything
is stopped."

"And do you really go to-night?"

"I really go to-night, for the case has become too pressing to
admit of delay."

"And do you take no one with you?"

"All sorts of people have been proposed to me, but I will have
nothing to say to any of them.  I intend to take Jerry.  Jerry has
been my bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time past and I am used
to him.  Nobody will suspect Jerry of being anything but an English
bull-dog, or of having any design in his head but to fly at anybody
who touches his master."

"I must say again that I heartily admire your gallantry and
youthfulness."

"I must say again, nonsense, nonsense!  When I have executed this
little commission, I shall, perhaps, accept Tellson's proposal to retire
and live at my ease.  Time enough, then, to think about growing old."

This dialogue had taken place at Mr. Lorry's usual desk, with Monseigneur
swarming within a yard or two of it, boastful of what he would do to
avenge himself on the rascal-people before long.  It was too much the
way of Monseigneur under his reverses as a refugee, and it was much
too much the way of native British orthodoxy, to talk of this terrible
Revolution as if it were the only harvest ever known under the skies
that had not been sown--as if nothing had ever been done, or omitted
to be done, that had led to it--as if observers of the wretched
millions in France, and of the misused and perverted resources that
should have made them prosperous, had not seen it inevitably coming,
years before, and had not in plain words recorded what they saw.  Such
vapouring, combined with the extravagant plots of Monseigneur for the
restoration of a state of things that had utterly exhausted itself,
and worn out Heaven and earth as well as itself, was hard to be endured
without some remonstrance by any sane man who knew the truth.  And it
was such vapouring all about his ears, like a troublesome confusion of
blood in his own head, added to a latent uneasiness in his mind, which
had already made Charles Darnay restless, and which still kept him so.

Among the talkers, was Stryver, of the King's Bench Bar, far on his
way to state promotion, and, therefore, loud on the theme:  broaching
to Monseigneur, his devices for blowing the people up and
exterminating them from the face of the earth, and doing without them:
and for accomplishing many similar objects akin in their nature to
the abolition of eagles by sprinkling salt on the tails of the race.
Him, Darnay heard with a particular feeling of objection; and Darnay
stood divided between going away that he might hear no more, and
remaining to interpose his word, when the thing that was to be, went
on to shape itself out.

The House approached Mr. Lorry, and laying a soiled and unopened
letter before him, asked if he had yet discovered any traces of the
person to whom it was addressed?  The House laid the letter down so
close to Darnay that he saw the direction--the more quickly because
it was his own right name.  The address, turned into English, ran:

"Very pressing.  To Monsieur heretofore the Marquis St. Evremonde,
of France.  Confided to the cares of Messrs. Tellson and Co., Bankers,
London, England."

On the marriage morning, Doctor Manette bad made it his one urgent
and express request to Charles Darnay, that the secret of this name
should be--unless he, the Doctor, dissolved the obligation--kept
inviolate between them.  Nobody else knew it to be his name; his own
wife had no suspicion of the fact; Mr. Lorry could have none.

"No," said Mr. Lorry, in reply to the House; "I have referred it,
I think, to everybody now here, and no one can tell me where this
gentleman is to be found."

The hands of the clock verging upon the hour of closing the Bank,
there was a general set of the current of talkers past Mr. Lorry's
desk.  He held the letter out inquiringly; and Monseigneur looked at
it, in the person of this plotting and indignant refugee; and
Monseigneur looked at it in the person of that plotting and indignant
refugee; and This, That, and The Other, all had something disparaging
to say, in French or in English, concerning the Marquis who was not
to be found.

"Nephew, I believe--but in any case degenerate successor--of the
polished Marquis who was murdered," said one.  "Happy to say, I never
knew him."

"A craven who abandoned his post," said another--this Monseigneur
had been got out of Paris, legs uppermost and half suffocated, in a
load of hay--"some years ago."

"Infected with the new doctrines," said a third, eyeing the direction
through his glass in passing; "set himself in opposition to the last
Marquis, abandoned the estates when he inherited them, and left them
to the ruffian herd.  They will recompense him now, I hope,
as he deserves."

"Hey?" cried the blatant Stryver.  "Did he though?  Is that the sort
of fellow?  Let us look at his infamous name.  D--n the fellow!"

Darnay, unable to restrain himself any longer, touched Mr. Stryver on
the shoulder, and said:

"I know the fellow."

"Do you, by Jupiter?" said Stryver.  "I am sorry for it."

"Why?"

"Why, Mr. Darnay?  D'ye hear what he did?  Don't ask, why,
in these times."

"But I do ask why?"

"Then I tell you again, Mr. Darnay, I am sorry for it.  I am sorry to
hear you putting any such extraordinary questions.  Here is a fellow,
who, infected by the most pestilent and blasphemous code of devilry
that ever was known, abandoned his property to the vilest scum of the
earth that ever did murder by wholesale, and you ask me why I am
sorry that a man who instructs youth knows him?  Well, but I'll
answer you.  I am sorry because I believe there is contamination in
such a scoundrel.  That's why."

Mindful of the secret, Darnay with great difficulty checked himself,
and said:  "You may not understand the gentleman."

"I understand how to put YOU in a corner, Mr. Darnay," said Bully
Stryver, "and I'll do it.  If this fellow is a gentleman, I DON'T
understand him.  You may tell him so, with my compliments.  You may
also tell him, from me, that after abandoning his worldly goods and
position to this butcherly mob, I wonder he is not at the head of them.
But, no, gentlemen," said Stryver, looking all round, and snapping his
fingers, "I know something of human nature, and I tell you that you'll
never find a fellow like this fellow, trusting himself to the mercies
of such precious PROTEGES.  No, gentlemen; he'll always show 'em
a clean pair of heels very early in the scuffle, and sneak away."

With those words, and a final snap of his fingers, Mr. Stryver
shouldered himself into Fleet-street, amidst the general approbation
of his hearers.  Mr. Lorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at the
desk, in the general departure from the Bank.

"Will you take charge of the letter?" said Mr. Lorry.  "You know
where to deliver it?"

"I do."

"Will you undertake to explain, that we suppose it to have been
addressed here, on the chance of our knowing where to forward it,
and that it has been here some time?"

"I will do so.  Do you start for Paris from here?"

"From here, at eight."

"I will come back, to see you off."

Very ill at ease with himself, and with Stryver and most other men,
Darnay made the best of his way into the quiet of the Temple,
opened the letter, and read it.  These were its contents:


"Prison of the Abbaye, Paris.

"June 21, 1792.
"MONSIEUR HERETOFORE THE MARQUIS.

"After having long been in danger of my life at the hands of the
village, I have been seized, with great violence and indignity, and
brought a long journey on foot to Paris.  On the road I have suffered
a great deal.  Nor is that all; my house has been destroyed--razed
to the ground.

"The crime for which I am imprisoned, Monsieur heretofore the
Marquis, and for which I shall be summoned before the tribunal, and
shall lose my life (without your so generous help), is, they tell me,
treason against the majesty of the people, in that I have acted
against them for an emigrant.  It is in vain I represent that I have
acted for them, and not against, according to your commands.  It is
in vain I represent that, before the sequestration of emigrant
property, I had remitted the imposts they had ceased to pay; that I
had collected no rent; that I had had recourse to no process.  The
only response is, that I have acted for an emigrant, and where is
that emigrant?

"Ah! most gracious Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, where is that
emigrant?  I cry in my sleep where is he?  I demand of Heaven, will
he not come to deliver me?  No answer.  Ah Monsieur heretofore the
Marquis, I send my desolate cry across the sea, hoping it may perhaps
reach your ears through the great bank of Tilson known at Paris!

"For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the honour of
your noble name, I supplicate you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis,
to succour and release me.  My fault is, that I have been true to you.
Oh Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, I pray you be you true to me!

"From this prison here of horror, whence I every hour tend nearer
and nearer to destruction, I send you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis,
the assurance of my dolorous and unhappy service.


"Your afflicted,

"Gabelle."


The latent uneasiness in Darnay's mind was roused to vigourous life
by this letter.  The peril of an old servant and a good one, whose
only crime was fidelity to himself and his family, stared him so
reproachfully in the face, that, as he walked to and fro in the Temple
considering what to do, he almost hid his face from the passersby.

He knew very well, that in his horror of the deed which had culminated
the bad deeds and bad reputation of the old family house, in his
resentful suspicions of his uncle, and in the aversion with which his
conscience regarded the crumbling fabric that he was supposed to
uphold, he had acted imperfectly.  He knew very well, that in his love
for Lucie, his renunciation of his social place, though by no means
new to his own mind, had been hurried and incomplete.  He knew that
he ought to have systematically worked it out and supervised it, and
that he had meant to do it, and that it had never been done.

The happiness of his own chosen English home, the necessity of being
always actively employed, the swift changes and troubles of the time
which bad followed on one another so fast, that the events of this
week annihilated the immature plans of last week, and the events of
the week following made all new again; he knew very well, that to the
force of these circumstances he had yielded:--not without disquiet,
but still without continuous and accumulating resistance.  That he
had watched the times for a time of action, and that they had shifted
and struggled until the time had gone by, and the nobility were
trooping from France by every highway and byway, and their property
was in course of confiscation and destruction, and their very names
were blotting out, was as well known to himself as it could be to any
new authority in France that might impeach him for it.

But, he had oppressed no man, he had imprisoned no man; he was so far
from having harshly exacted payment of his dues, that he had
relinquished them of his own will, thrown himself on a world with no
favour in it, won his own private place there, and earned his own
bread.  Monsieur Gabelle had held the impoverished and involved estate
on written instructions, to spare the people, to give them what little
there was to give--such fuel as the heavy creditors would let them
have in the winter, and such produce as could be saved from the same
grip in the summer--and no doubt he had put the fact in plea and proof,
for his own safety, so that it could not but appear now.

This favoured the desperate resolution Charles Darnay had begun to make,
that he would go to Paris.

Yes.  Like the mariner in the old story, the winds and streams had
driven him within the influence of the Loadstone Rock, and it was
drawing him to itself, and he must go.  Everything that arose before
his mind drifted him on, faster and faster, more and more steadily,
to the terrible attraction.  His latent uneasiness had been, that bad
aims were being worked out in his own unhappy land by bad instruments,
and that he who could not fail to know that he was better than they,
was not there, trying to do something to stay bloodshed, and assert
the claims of mercy and humanity.  With this uneasiness half stifled,
and half reproaching him, he had been brought to the pointed comparison
of himself with the brave old gentleman in whom duty was so strong;
upon that comparison (injurious to himself) had instantly followed
the sneers of Monseigneur, which had stung him bitterly, and those of
Stryver, which above all were coarse and galling, for old reasons.
Upon those, had followed Gabelle's letter:  the appeal of an innocent
prisoner, in danger of death, to his justice, honour, and good name.

His resolution was made.  He must go to Paris.

Yes.  The Loadstone Rock was drawing him, and he must sail on, until
he struck.  He knew of no rock; he saw hardly any danger.  The
intention with which he had done what he had done, even although he
had left it incomplete, presented it before him in an aspect that
would be gratefully acknowledged in France on his presenting himself
to assert it.  Then, that glorious vision of doing good, which is so
often the sanguine mirage of so many good minds, arose before him,
and he even saw himself in the illusion with some influence to guide
this raging Revolution that was running so fearfully wild.

As he walked to and fro with his resolution made, he considered that
neither Lucie nor her father must know of it until he was gone.
Lucie should be spared the pain of separation; and her father, always
reluctant to turn his thoughts towards the dangerous ground of old,
should come to the knowledge of the step, as a step taken, and not in
the balance of suspense and doubt.  How much of the incompleteness of
his situation was referable to her father, through the painful
anxiety to avoid reviving old associations of France in his mind, he
did not discuss with himself.  But, that circumstance too,
had had its influence in his course.

He walked to and fro, with thoughts very busy, until it was time to
return to Tellson's and take leave of Mr. Lorry.  As soon as he
arrived in Paris he would present himself to this old friend, but he
must say nothing of his intention now.

A carriage with post-horses was ready at the Bank door, and Jerry
was booted and equipped.

"I have delivered that letter," said Charles Darnay to Mr. Lorry.
"I would not consent to your being charged with any written answer,
but perhaps you will take a verbal one?"

"That I will, and readily," said Mr. Lorry, "if it is not dangerous."

"Not at all.  Though it is to a prisoner in the Abbaye."

"What is his name?" said Mr. Lorry, with his open pocket-book in his hand.

"Gabelle."

"Gabelle.  And what is the message to the unfortunate Gabelle in prison?"

"Simply, `that he has received the letter, and will come.'"

"Any time mentioned?"

"He will start upon his journey to-morrow night."

"Any person mentioned?"

"No."

He helped Mr. Lorry to wrap himself in a number of coats and cloaks,
and went out with him from the warm atmosphere of the old Bank, into
the misty air of Fleet-street.  "My love to Lucie, and to little
Lucie," said Mr. Lorry at parting, "and take precious care of them
till I come back."  Charles Darnay shook his head and doubtfully smiled,
as the carriage rolled away.

That night--it was the fourteenth of August--he sat up late, and
wrote two fervent letters; one was to Lucie, explaining the strong
obligation he was under to go to Paris, and showing her, at length,
the reasons that he had, for feeling confident that he could become
involved in no personal danger there; the other was to the Doctor,
confiding Lucie and their dear child to his care, and dwelling on
the same topics with the strongest assurances.  To both, he wrote
that he would despatch letters in proof of his safety, immediately
after his arrival.

It was a hard day, that day of being among them, with the first
reservation of their joint lives on his mind.  It was a hard matter
to preserve the innocent deceit of which they were profoundly
unsuspicious.  But, an affectionate glance at his wife, so happy and
busy, made him resolute not to tell her what impended (he had been
half moved to do it, so strange it was to him to act in anything
without her quiet aid), and the day passed quickly.  Early in the
evening he embraced her, and her scarcely less dear namesake, pretending
that he would return by-and-bye (an imaginary engagement took him out,
and he had secreted a valise of clothes ready), and so he emerged
into the heavy mist of the heavy streets, with a heavier heart.

The unseen force was drawing him fast to itself, now, and all the
tides and winds were setting straight and strong towards it.  He left
his two letters with a trusty porter, to be delivered half an hour
before midnight, and no sooner; took horse for Dover; and began his
journey.  "For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the
honour of your noble name!" was the poor prisoner's cry with which
he strengthened his sinking heart, as he left all that was dear on
earth behind him, and floated away for the Loadstone Rock.



The end of the second book.





Book the Third--the Track of a Storm




I

In Secret


The traveller fared slowly on his way, who fared towards Paris from
England in the autumn of the year one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-two.  More than enough of bad roads, bad equipages, and bad
horses, he would have encountered to delay him, though the fallen and
unfortunate King of France had been upon his throne in all his glory;
but, the changed times were fraught with other obstacles than these.
Every town-gate and village taxing-house had its band of citizen-
patriots, with their national muskets in a most explosive state of
readiness, who stopped all comers and goers, cross-questioned them,
inspected their papers, looked for their names in lists of their own,
turned them back, or sent them on, or stopped them and laid them in
hold, as their capricious judgment or fancy deemed best for the
dawning Republic One and Indivisible, of Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity, or Death.

A very few French leagues of his journey were accomplished, when
Charles Darnay began to perceive that for him along these country
roads there was no hope of return until he should have been declared
a good citizen at Paris.  Whatever might befall now, he must on to
his journey's end.  Not a mean village closed upon him, not a common
barrier dropped across the road behind him, but he knew it to be
another iron door in the series that was barred between him and
England.  The universal watchfulness so encompassed him, that if he
had been taken in a net, or were being forwarded to his destination
in a cage, he could not have felt his freedom more completely gone.

This universal watchfulness not only stopped him on the highway
twenty times in a stage, but retarded his progress twenty times in a
day, by riding after him and taking him back, riding before him and
stopping him by anticipation, riding with him and keeping him in
charge.  He had been days upon his journey in France alone, when he
went to bed tired out, in a little town on the high road, still a
long way from Paris.

Nothing but the production of the afflicted Gabelle's letter from his
prison of the Abbaye would have got him on so far.  Ms difficulty at
the guard-house in this small place had been such, that he felt his
journey to have come to a crisis.  And he was, therefore, as little
surprised as a man could be, to find himself awakened at the small
inn to which he had been remitted until morning, in the middle of the
night.

Awakened by a timid local functionary and three armed patriots in
rough red caps and with pipes in their mouths, who sat down on the bed.

"Emigrant," said the functionary, "I am going to send you on to Paris,
under an escort."

"Citizen, I desire nothing more than to get to Paris, though I could
dispense with the escort."

"Silence!" growled a red-cap, striking at the coverlet with the
butt-end of his musket.  "Peace, aristocrat!"

"It is as the good patriot says," observed the timid functionary.
"You are an aristocrat, and must have an escort--and must pay for it."

"I have no choice," said Charles Darnay.

"Choice!  Listen to him!" cried the same scowling red-cap.  "As if it
was not a favour to be protected from the lamp-iron!"

"It is always as the good patriot says," observed the functionary.
"Rise and dress yourself, emigrant."

Darnay complied, and was taken back to the guard-house, where other
patriots in rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping, by a
watch-fire.  Here he paid a heavy price for his escort, and hence he
started with it on the wet, wet roads at three o'clock in the morning.

The escort were two mounted patriots in red caps and tri-coloured
cockades, armed with national muskets and sabres, who rode one on
either side of him.

The escorted governed his own horse, but a loose line was attached to
his bridle, the end of which one of the patriots kept girded round
his wrist. In this state they set forth with the sharp rain driving
in their faces:  clattering at a heavy dragoon trot over the uneven
town pavement, and out upon the mire-deep roads.  In this state they
traversed without change, except of horses and pace, all the mire-
deep leagues that lay between them and the capital.

They travelled in the night, halting an hour or two after daybreak,
and lying by until the twilight fell.  The escort were so wretchedly
clothed, that they twisted straw round their bare legs, and thatched
their ragged shoulders to keep the wet off.  Apart from the personal
discomfort of being so attended, and apart from such considerations
of present danger as arose from one of the patriots being chronically
drunk, and carrying his musket very recklessly, Charles Darnay did
not allow the restraint that was laid upon him to awaken any serious
fears in his breast; for, he reasoned with himself that it could have
no reference to the merits of an individual case that was not yet
stated, and of representations, confirmable by the prisoner in the
Abbaye, that were not yet made.

But when they came to the town of Beauvais--which they did at
eventide, when the streets were filled with people--he could not
conceal from himself that the aspect of affairs was very alarming.
An ominous crowd gathered to see him dismount of the posting-yard,
and many voices called out loudly, "Down with the emigrant!"

He stopped in the act of swinging himself out of his saddle, and,
resuming it as his safest place, said:

"Emigrant, my friends!  Do you not see me here, in France, of my own will?"

"You are a cursed emigrant," cried a farrier, making at him in a
furious manner through the press, hammer in hand; "and you are a
cursed aristocrat!"

The postmaster interposed himself between this man and the rider's
bridle (at which he was evidently making), and soothingly said,
"Let him be; let him be!  He will be judged at Paris."

"Judged!" repeated the farrier, swinging his hammer.
"Ay! and condemned as a traitor."  At this the crowd roared approval.

Checking the postmaster, who was for turning his horse's head to the
yard (the drunken patriot sat composedly in his saddle looking on,
with the line round his wrist), Darnay said, as soon as he could make
his voice heard:

"Friends, you deceive yourselves, or you are deceived.  I am not a traitor."

"He lies!" cried the smith. "He is a traitor since the decree.
His life is forfeit to the people.  His cursed life is not his own!"

At the instant when Darnay saw a rush in the eyes of the crowd,
which another instant would have brought upon him, the postmaster
turned his horse into the yard, the escort rode in close upon his
horse's flanks, and the postmaster shut and barred the crazy double
gates.  The farrier struck a blow upon them with his hammer, and the
crowd groaned; but, no more was done.

"What is this decree that the smith spoke of?" Darnay asked the
postmaster, when he had thanked him, and stood beside him in the yard.

"Truly, a decree for selling the property of emigrants."

"When passed?"

"On the fourteenth."

"The day I left England!"

"Everybody says it is but one of several, and that there will be
others--if there are not already-banishing all emigrants, and
condemning all to death who return.  That is what he meant when he
said your life was not your own."

"But there are no such decrees yet?"

"What do I know!" said the postmaster, shrugging his shoulders;
"there may be, or there will be.  It is all the same.  What would
you have?"

They rested on some straw in a loft until the middle of the night,
and then rode forward again when all the town was asleep.  Among the
many wild changes observable on familiar things which made this wild
ride unreal, not the least was the seeming rarity of sleep.
After long and lonely spurring over dreary roads, they would come to
a cluster of poor cottages, not steeped in darkness, but all
glittering with lights, and would find the people, in a ghostly
manner in the dead of the night, circling hand in hand round a
shrivelled tree of Liberty, or all drawn up together singing a
Liberty song.  Happily, however, there was sleep in Beauvais that
night to help them out of it and they passed on once more into
solitude and loneliness:  jingling through the untimely cold and wet,
among impoverished fields that had yielded no fruits of the earth
that year, diversified by the blackened remains of burnt houses, and
by the sudden emergence from ambuscade, and sharp reining up across
their way, of patriot patrols on the watch on all the roads.

Daylight at last found them before the wall of Paris.  The barrier
was closed and strongly guarded when they rode up to it.

"Where are the papers of this prisoner?" demanded a resolute-looking
man in authority, who was summoned out by the guard.

Naturally struck by the disagreeable word, Charles Darnay requested
the speaker to take notice that he was a free traveller and French
citizen, in charge of an escort which the disturbed state of the
country had imposed upon him, and which he had paid for.

"Where," repeated the same personage, without taking any heed of him
whatever, "are the papers of this prisoner?"

The drunken patriot had them in his cap, and produced them.  Casting his
eyes over Gabelle's letter, the same personage in authority showed
some disorder and surprise, and looked at Darnay with a close attention.

He left escort and escorted without saying a word, however, and went
into the guard-room; meanwhile, they sat upon their horses outside
the gate.  Looking about him while in this state of suspense, Charles
Darnay observed that the gate was held by a mixed guard of soldiers
and patriots, the latter far outnumbering the former; and that while
ingress into the city for peasants' carts bringing in supplies, and
for similar traffic and traffickers, was easy enough, egress, even
for the homeliest people, was very difficult.  A numerous medley of
men and women, not to mention beasts and vehicles of various sorts,
was waiting to issue forth; but, the previous identification was so
strict, that they filtered through the barrier very slowly.  Some of
these people knew their turn for examination to be so far off, that
they lay down on the ground to sleep or smoke, while others talked
together, or loitered about.  The red cap and tri-colour cockade were
universal, both among men and women.

When he had sat in his saddle some half-hour, taking note of these
things, Darnay found himself confronted by the same man in authority,
who directed the guard to open the barrier.  Then he delivered to the
escort, drunk and sober, a receipt for the escorted, and requested him
to dismount.  He did so, and the two patriots, leading his tired horse,
turned and rode away without entering the city.

He accompanied his conductor into a guard-room, smelling of common
wine and tobacco, where certain soldiers and patriots, asleep and
awake, drunk and sober, and in various neutral states between
sleeping and waking, drunkenness and sobriety, were standing and
lying about. The light in the guard-house, half derived from the
waning oil-lamps of the night, and half from the overcast day, was in
a correspondingly uncertain condition.  Some registers were lying
open on a desk, and an officer of a coarse, dark aspect, presided
over these.

"Citizen Defarge," said he to Darnay's conductor, as he took a slip
of paper to write on.  "Is this the emigrant Evremonde?"

"This is the man."

"Your age, Evremonde?"

"Thirty-seven."

"Married, Evremonde?"

"Yes."

"Where married?"

"In England."

"Without doubt.  Where is your wife, Evremonde?"

"In England."

"Without doubt.  You are consigned, Evremonde, to the prison of La Force."

"Just Heaven!" exclaimed Darnay.  "Under what law, and for what offence?"

The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment.

"We have new laws, Evremonde, and new offences, since you were here."
He said it with a hard smile, and went on writing.

"I entreat you to observe that I have come here voluntarily, in response
to that written appeal of a fellow-countryman which lies before you.
I demand no more than the opportunity to do so without delay.
Is not that my right?"

"Emigrants have no rights, Evremonde," was the stolid reply.
The officer wrote until he had finished, read over to himself what he
had written, sanded it, and handed it to Defarge, with the words
"In secret."

Defarge motioned with the paper to the prisoner that he must
accompany him.  The prisoner obeyed, and a guard of two armed
patriots attended them.

"Is it you," said Defarge, in a low voice, as they went down the
guardhouse steps and turned into Paris, "who married the daughter of
Doctor Manette, once a prisoner in the Bastille that is no more?"

"Yes," replied Darnay, looking at him with surprise.

"My name is Defarge, and I keep a wine-shop in the Quarter Saint
Antoine.  Possibly you have heard of me."

"My wife came to your house to reclaim her father?  Yes!"

The word "wife" seemed to serve as a gloomy reminder to Defarge,
to say with sudden impatience, "In the name of that sharp female
newly-born, and called La Guillotine, why did you come to France?"

"You heard me say why, a minute ago.  Do you not believe it is the
truth?"

"A bad truth for you," said Defarge, speaking with knitted brows,
and looking straight before him.

"Indeed I am lost here.  All here is so unprecedented, so changed,
so sudden and unfair, that I am absolutely lost.  Will you render me
a little help?"

"None."  Defarge spoke, always looking straight before him.

"Will you answer me a single question?"

"Perhaps.  According to its nature.  You can say what it is."

"In this prison that I am going to so unjustly, shall I have some
free communication with the world outside?"

"You will see."

"I am not to be buried there, prejudged, and without any means of
presenting my case?"

"You will see.  But, what then?  Other people have been similarly
buried in worse prisons, before now."

"But never by me, Citizen Defarge."

Defarge glanced darkly at him for answer, and walked on in a steady
and set silence.  The deeper he sank into this silence, the fainter
hope there was--or so Darnay thought--of his softening in any slight
degree. He, therefore, made haste to say:

"It is of the utmost importance to me (you know, Citizen, even better
than I, of how much importance), that I should be able to communicate
to Mr. Lorry of Tellson's Bank, an English gentleman who is now in
Paris, the simple fact, without comment, that I have been thrown into
the prison of La Force.  Will you cause that to be done for me?"

"I will do," Defarge doggedly rejoined, "nothing for you.  My duty is
to my country and the People.  I am the sworn servant of both,
against you. I will do nothing for you."

Charles Darnay felt it hopeless to entreat him further, and his pride
was touched besides.  As they walked on in silence, he could not but
see how used the people were to the spectacle of prisoners passing
along the streets.  The very children scarcely noticed him.  A few
passers turned their heads, and a few shook their fingers at him as
an aristocrat; otherwise, that a man in good clothes should be going
to prison, was no more remarkable than that a labourer in working
clothes should be going to work.  In one narrow, dark, and dirty
street through which they passed, an excited orator, mounted on a stool,
was addressing an excited audience on the cranes against the people,
of the king and the royal family.  The few words that he caught from
this man's lips, first made it known to Charles Darnay that the king
was in prison, and that the foreign ambassadors had one and all left
Paris.  On the road (except at Beauvais) he had heard absolutely nothing.
The escort and the universal watchfulness had completely isolated him.

That he had fallen among far greater dangers than those which had
developed themselves when he left England, he of course knew now.
That perils had thickened about him fast, and might thicken faster
and faster yet, he of course knew now.  He could not but admit to
himself that he might not have made this journey, if he could have
foreseen the events of a few days.  And yet his misgivings were not
so dark as, imagined by the light of this later time, they would appear.
Troubled as the future was, it was the unknown future, and in its
obscurity there was ignorant hope.  The horrible massacre, days and
nights long, which, within a few rounds of the clock, was to set a
great mark of blood upon the blessed garnering time of harvest, was
as far out of his knowledge as if it had been a hundred thousand
years away.  The "sharp female newly-born, and called La Guillotine,"
was hardly known to him, or to the generality of people, by name.
The frightful deeds that were to be soon done, were probably
unimagined at that time in the brains of the doers.  How could they
have a place in the shadowy conceptions of a gentle mind?

Of unjust treatment in detention and hardship, and in cruel
separation from his wife and child, he foreshadowed the likelihood,
or the certainty; but, beyond this, he dreaded nothing distinctly.
With this on his mind, which was enough to carry into a dreary prison
courtyard, he arrived at the prison of La Force.

A man with a bloated face opened the strong wicket, to whom Defarge
presented "The Emigrant Evremonde."

"What the Devil!  How many more of them!" exclaimed the man with
the bloated face.

Defarge took his receipt without noticing the exclamation,
and withdrew, with his two fellow-patriots.

"What the Devil, I say again!" exclaimed the gaoler, left with his wife.
"How many more!"

The gaoler's wife, being provided with no answer to the question,
merely replied, "One must have patience, my dear!"  Three turnkeys who
entered responsive to a bell she rang, echoed the sentiment, and one
added, "For the love of Liberty;" which sounded in that place like an
inappropriate conclusion.

The prison of La Force was a gloomy prison, dark and filthy, and with
a horrible smell of foul sleep in it.  Extraordinary how soon the
noisome flavour of imprisoned sleep, becomes manifest in all such
places that are ill cared for!

"In secret, too," grumbled the gaoler, looking at the written paper.
"As if I was not already full to bursting!"

He stuck the paper on a file, in an ill-humour, and Charles Darnay
awaited his further pleasure for half an hour:  sometimes, pacing to
and fro in the strong arched room:  sometimes, resting on a stone seat:
in either case detained to be imprinted on the memory of the chief
and his subordinates.

"Come!" said the chief, at length taking up his keys, "come with me, emigrant."

Through the dismal prison twilight, his new charge accompanied him by
corridor and staircase, many doors clanging and locking behind them,
until they came into a large, low, vaulted chamber, crowded with
prisoners of both sexes.  The women were seated at a long table,
reading and writing, knitting, sewing, and embroidering; the men were
for the most part standing behind their chairs, or lingering up and
down the room.

In the instinctive association of prisoners with shameful crime and
disgrace, the new-comer recoiled from this company.  But the crowning
unreality of his long unreal ride, was, their all at once rising to
receive him, with every refinement of manner known to the time, and
with all the engaging graces and courtesies of life.

So strangely clouded were these refinements by the prison manners and
gloom, so spectral did they become in the inappropriate squalor and
misery through which they were seen, that Charles Darnay seemed to
stand in a company of the dead.  Ghosts all!  The ghost of beauty,
the ghost of stateliness, the ghost of elegance, the ghost of pride,
the ghost of frivolity, the ghost of wit, the ghost of youth, the
ghost of age, all waiting their dismissal from the desolate shore,
all turning on him eyes that were changed by the death they had died
in coming there.

It struck him motionless.  The gaoler standing at his side, and the
other gaolers moving about, who would have been well enough as to
appearance in the ordinary exercise of their functions, looked so
extravagantly coarse contrasted with sorrowing mothers and blooming
daughters who were there--with the apparitions of the coquette,
the young beauty, and the mature woman delicately bred--that the
inversion of all experience and likelihood which the scene of shadows
presented, was heightened to its utmost.  Surely, ghosts all.
Surely, the long unreal ride some progress of disease that had
brought him to these gloomy shades!

"In the name of the assembled companions in misfortune," said a
gentleman of courtly appearance and address, coming forward,
"I have the honour of giving you welcome to La Force, and of
condoling with you on the calamity that has brought you among us.
May it soon terminate happily!  It would be an impertinence elsewhere,
but it is not so here, to ask your name and condition?"

Charles Darnay roused himself, and gave the required information,
in words as suitable as he could find.

"But I hope," said the gentleman, following the chief gaoler with his
eyes, who moved across the room, "that you are not in secret?"

"I do not understand the meaning of the term, but I have heard them
say so."

"Ah, what a pity!  We so much regret it!  But take courage; several
members of our society have been in secret, at first, and it has
lasted but a short time."  Then he added, raising his voice,
"I grieve to inform the society--in secret."

There was a murmur of commiseration as Charles Darnay crossed the
room to a grated door where the gaoler awaited him, and many
voices--among which, the soft and compassionate voices of women were
conspicuous--gave him good wishes and encouragement.  He turned at
the grated door, to render the thanks of his heart; it closed under
the gaoler's hand; and the apparitions vanished from his sight forever.

The wicket opened on a stone staircase, leading upward.  When they
bad ascended forty steps (the prisoner of half an hour already
counted them), the gaoler opened a low black door, and they passed
into a solitary cell.  It struck cold and damp, but was not dark.

"Yours," said the gaoler.

"Why am I confined alone?"

"How do I know!"

"I can buy pen, ink, and paper?"

"Such are not my orders.  You will be visited, and can ask then.
At present, you may buy your food, and nothing more."

There were in the cell, a chair, a table, and a straw mattress.
As the gaoler made a general inspection of these objects, and of the
four walls, before going out, a wandering fancy wandered through the
mind of the prisoner leaning against the wall opposite to him, that
this gaoler was so unwholesomely bloated, both in face and person,
as to look like a man who had been drowned and filled with water.
When the gaoler was gone, he thought in the same wandering way,
"Now am I left, as if I were dead."  Stopping then, to look down at
the mattress, he turned from it with a sick feeling, and thought,
"And here in these crawling creatures is the first condition of the
body after death."

"Five paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half, five
paces by four and a half."  The prisoner walked to and fro in his
cell, counting its measurement, and the roar of the city arose like
muffled drums with a wild swell of voices added to them.  "He made
shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes."  The prisoner counted the
measurement again, and paced faster, to draw his mind with him from
that latter repetition.  "The ghosts that vanished when the wicket
closed.  There was one among them, the appearance of a lady dressed
in black, who was leaning in the embrasure of a window, and she had a
light shining upon her golden hair, and she looked like * * * * Let
us ride on again, for God's sake, through the illuminated villages
with the people all awake! * * * * He made shoes, he made shoes,
he made shoes. * * * * Five paces by four and a half."  With such scraps
tossing and rolling upward from the depths of his mind, the prisoner
walked faster and faster, obstinately counting and counting; and the
roar of the city changed to this extent--that it still rolled in like
muffled drums, but with the wail of voices that he knew, in the swell
that rose above them.



II

The Grindstone


Tellson's Bank, established in the Saint Germain Quarter of Paris,
was in a wing of a large house, approached by a courtyard and shut
off from the street by a high wall and a strong gate.  The house
belonged to a great nobleman who had lived in it until he made a
flight from the troubles, in his own cook's dress, and got across the
borders.  A mere beast of the chase flying from hunters, he was still
in his metempsychosis no other than the same Monseigneur, the
preparation of whose chocolate for whose lips had once occupied three
strong men besides the cook in question.

Monseigneur gone, and the three strong men absolving themselves from
the sin of having drawn his high wages, by being more than ready and
willing to cut his throat on the altar of the dawning Republic one and
indivisible of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, Monseigneur's
house had been first sequestrated, and then confiscated.  For, all
things moved so fast, and decree followed decree with that fierce
precipitation, that now upon the third night of the autumn month of
September, patriot emissaries of the law were in possession of
Monseigneur's house, and had marked it with the tri-colour, and were
drinking brandy in its state apartments.

A place of business in London like Tellson's place of business in
Paris, would soon have driven the House out of its mind and into the
Gazette. For, what would staid British responsibility and
respectability have said to orange-trees in boxes in a Bank courtyard,
and even to a Cupid over the counter?  Yet such things were.
Tellson's had whitewashed the Cupid, but he was still to be seen on
the ceiling, in the coolest linen, aiming (as he very often does) at
money from morning to night.  Bankruptcy must inevitably have come of
this young Pagan, in Lombard-street, London, and also of a curtained
alcove in the rear of the immortal boy, and also of a looking-glass
let into the wall, and also of clerks not at all old, who danced in
public on the slightest provocation.  Yet, a French Tellson's could
get on with these things exceedingly well, and, as long as the times
held together, no man had taken fright at them, and drawn out his money.

What money would be drawn out of Tellson's henceforth, and what would
lie there, lost and forgotten; what plate and jewels would tarnish in
Tellson's hiding-places, while the depositors rusted in prisons, and
when they should have violently perished; how many accounts with
Tellson's never to be balanced in this world, must be carried over
into the next; no man could have said, that night, any more than
Mr. Jarvis Lorry could, though he thought heavily of these questions.
He sat by a newly-lighted wood fire (the blighted and unfruitful year
was prematurely cold), and on his honest and courageous face there
was a deeper shade than the pendent lamp could throw, or any object
in the room distortedly reflect--a shade of horror.

He occupied rooms in the Bank, in his fidelity to the House of which
he had grown to be a part, lie strong root-ivy. it chanced that they
derived a kind of security from the patriotic occupation of the main
building, but the true-hearted old gentleman never calculated about
that.  All such circumstances were indifferent to him, so that he did
his duty.  On the opposite side of the courtyard, under a colonnade,
was extensive standin--for carriages--where, indeed, some carriages
of Monseigneur yet stood.  Against two of the pillars were fastened
two great flaring flambeaux, and in the light of these, standing out
in the open air, was a large grindstone:  a roughly mounted thing
which appeared to have hurriedly been brought there from some
neighbouring smithy, or other workshop.  Rising and looking out of
window at these harmless objects, Mr. Lorry shivered, and retired to
his seat by the fire.  He had opened, not only the glass window, but
the lattice blind outside it, and he had closed both again, and he
shivered through his frame.

From the streets beyond the high wall and the strong gate, there came
the usual night hum of the city, with now and then an indescribable
ring in it, weird and unearthly, as if some unwonted sounds of a
terrible nature were going up to Heaven.

"Thank God," said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands, "that no one near
and dear to me is in this dreadful town to-night.  May He have mercy
on all who are in danger!"

Soon afterwards, the bell at the great gate sounded, and he thought,
"They have come back!" and sat listening.  But, there was no loud
irruption into the courtyard, as he had expected, and he heard the
gate clash again, and all was quiet.

The nervousness and dread that were upon him inspired that vague
uneasiness respecting the Bank, which a great change would naturally
awaken, with such feelings roused.  It was well guarded, and he got
up to go among the trusty people who were watching it, when his door
suddenly opened, and two figures rushed in, at sight of which he fell
back in amazement.

Lucie and her father!  Lucie with her arms stretched out to him, and
with that old look of earnestness so concentrated and intensified,
that it seemed as though it had been stamped upon her face expressly
to give force and power to it in this one passage of her life.

"What is this?" cried Mr. Lorry, breathless and confused.
"What is the matter?  Lucie!  Manette!  What has happened?  What has
brought you here?  What is it?"

With the look fixed upon him, in her paleness and wildness,
she panted out in his arms, imploringly, "O my dear friend!
My husband!"

"Your husband, Lucie?"

"Charles."

"What of Charles?"

"Here.

"Here, in Paris?"

"Has been here some days--three or four--I don't know how many--
I can't collect my thoughts.  An errand of generosity brought him
here unknown to us; he was stopped at the barrier, and sent to prison."

The old man uttered an irrepressible cry.  Almost at the same moment,
the beg of the great gate rang again, and a loud noise of feet and
voices came pouring into the courtyard.

"What is that noise?" said the Doctor, turning towards the window.

"Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry.  "Don't look out!  Manette,
for your life, don't touch the blind!"

The Doctor turned, with his hand upon the fastening of the window,
and said, with a cool, bold smile:

"My dear friend, I have a charmed life in this city.  I have been a
Bastille prisoner.  There is no patriot in Paris--in Paris?  In
France--who, knowing me to have been a prisoner in the Bastille,
would touch me, except to overwhelm me with embraces, or carry me in
triumph.  My old pain has given me a power that has brought us
through the barrier, and gained us news of Charles there, and brought
us here.  I knew it would be so; I knew I could help Charles out of
all danger; I told Lucie so.--What is that noise?" His hand was again
upon the window.

"Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry, absolutely desperate.  "No, Lucie, my
dear, nor you!"  He got his arm round her, and held her.  "Don't be so
terrified, my love.  I solemnly swear to you that I know of no harm
having happened to Charles; that I had no suspicion even of his being
in this fatal place.  What prison is he in?"

"La Force!"

"La Force!  Lucie, my child, if ever you were brave and serviceable in
your life--and you were always both--you will compose yourself now,
to do exactly as I bid you; for more depends upon it than you can think,
or I can say.  There is no help for you in any action on your part
to-night; you cannot possibly stir out.  I say this, because what I
must bid you to do for Charles's sake, is the hardest thing to do of all.
You must instantly be obedient, still, and quiet.  You must let me
put you in a room at the back here.  You must leave your father and
me alone for two minutes, and as there are Life and Death in the
world you must not delay."

"I will be submissive to you.  I see in your face that you know I can
do nothing else than this.  I know you are true."

The old man kissed her, and hurried her into his room, and turned the
key; then, came hurrying back to the Doctor, and opened the window
and partly opened the blind, and put his hand upon the Doctor's arm,
and looked out with him into the courtyard.

Looked out upon a throng of men and women:  not enough in number, or
near enough, to fill the courtyard:  not more than forty or fifty in
all.  The people in possession of the house had let them in at the
gate, and they had rushed in to work at the grindstone; it had
evidently been set up there for their purpose, as in a convenient and
retired spot.

But, such awful workers, and such awful work!

The grindstone had a double handle, and, turning at it madly were two
men, whose faces, as their long hair Rapped back when the whirlings
of the grindstone brought their faces up, were more horrible and
cruel than the visages of the wildest savages in their most barbarous
disguise. False eyebrows and false moustaches were stuck upon them,
and their hideous countenances were all bloody and sweaty, and all
awry with howling, and all staring and glaring with beastly
excitement and want of sleep.  As these ruffians turned and turned,
their matted locks now flung forward over their eyes, now flung
backward over their necks, some women held wine to their mouths that
they might drink; and what with dropping blood, and what with
dropping wine, and what with the stream of sparks struck out of the
stone, all their wicked atmosphere seemed gore and fire.  The eye
could not detect one creature in the group free from the smear of blood.
Shouldering one another to get next at the sharpening-stone, were men
stripped to the waist, with the stain all over their limbs and
bodies; men in all sorts of rags, with the stain upon those rags; men
devilishly set off with spoils of women's lace and silk and ribbon,
with the stain dyeing those trifles through and through.  Hatchets,
knives, bayonets, swords, all brought to be sharpened, were all red
with it. Some of the hacked swords were tied to the wrists of those
who carried them, with strips of linen and fragments of dress:
ligatures various in kind, but all deep of the one colour.  And as
the frantic wielders of these weapons snatched them from the stream
of sparks and tore away into the streets, the same red hue was red in
their frenzied eyes;--eyes which any unbrutalised beholder would have
given twenty years of life, to petrify with a well-directed gun.

All this was seen in a moment, as the vision of a drowning man, or of
any human creature at any very great pass, could see a world if it
were there.  They drew back from the window, and the Doctor looked
for explanation in his friend's ashy face.

"They are," Mr. Lorry whispered the words, glancing fearfully round
at the locked room, "murdering the prisoners.  If you are sure of
what you say; if you really have the power you think you have--as I
believe you have--make yourself known to these devils, and get taken
to La Force.  It may be too late, I don't know, but let it not be a
minute later!"

Doctor Manette pressed his hand, hastened bareheaded out of the room,
and was in the courtyard when Mr. Lorry regained the blind.

His streaming white hair, his remarkable face, and the impetuous
confidence of his manner, as he put the weapons aside like water,
carried him in an instant to the heart of the concourse at the stone.
For a few moments there was a pause, and a hurry, and a murmur, and
the unintelligible sound of his voice; and then Mr. Lorry saw him,
surrounded by all, and in the midst of a line of twenty men long, all
linked shoulder to shoulder, and hand to shoulder, hurried out with
cries of--"Live the Bastille prisoner!  Help for the Bastille
prisoner's kindred in La Force!  Room for the Bastille prisoner in
front there!  Save the prisoner Evremonde at La Force!" and a thousand
answering shouts.

He closed the lattice again with a fluttering heart, closed the
window and the curtain, hastened to Lucie, and told her that her
father was assisted by the people, and gone in search of her husband.
He found her child and Miss Pross with her; but, it never occurred to
him to be surprised by their appearance until a long time afterwards,
when he sat watching them in such quiet as the night knew.

Lucie had, by that time, fallen into a stupor on the floor at his feet,
clinging to his hand.  Miss Pross had laid the child down on his own bed,
and her head had gradually fallen on the pillow beside her pretty charge.
O the long, long night, with the moans of the poor wife!  And O the long,
long night, with no return of her father and no tidings!

Twice more in the darkness the bell at the great gate sounded,
and the irruption was repeated, and the grindstone whirled and
spluttered.  "What is it?" cried Lucie, affrighted.  "Hush! The
soldiers' swords are sharpened there," said Mr. Lorry.  "The place
is national property now, and used as a kind of armoury, my love."

Twice more in all; but, the last spell of work was feeble and fitful.
Soon afterwards the day began to dawn, and he softly detached himself
from the clasping hand, and cautiously looked out again.  A man, so
besmeared that he might have been a sorely wounded soldier creeping
back to consciousness on a field of slain, was rising from the
pavement by the side of the grindstone, and looking about him with a
vacant air.  Shortly, this worn-out murderer descried in the imperfect
light one of the carriages of Monseigneur, and, staggering to that
gorgeous vehicle, climbed in at the door, and shut himself up to take
his rest on its dainty cushions.

The great grindstone, Earth, had turned when Mr. Lorry looked out again,
and the sun was red on the courtyard.  But, the lesser grindstone
stood alone there in the calm morning air, with a red upon it that
the sun had never given, and would never take away.



III

The Shadow


One of the first considerations which arose in the business mind of
Mr. Lorry when business hours came round, was this:--that he had no
right to imperil Tellson's by sheltering the wife of an emigrant
prisoner under the Bank roof, His own possessions, safety, life,
he would have hazarded for Lucie and her child, without a moment's
demur; but the great trust he held was not his own, and as to that
business charge he was a strict man of business.

At first, his mind reverted to Defarge, and he thought of finding out
the wine-shop again and taking counsel with its master in reference
to the safest dwelling-place in the distracted state of the city.
But, the same consideration that suggested him, repudiated him; he
lived in the most violent Quarter, and doubtless was influential
there, and deep in its dangerous workings.

Noon coming, and the Doctor not returning, and every minute's delay
tending to compromise Tellson's, Mr. Lorry advised with Lucie.
She said that her father had spoken of hiring a lodging for a short
term, in that Quarter, near the Banking-house.  As there was no
business objection to this, and as he foresaw that even if it were
all well with Charles, and he were to be released, he could not hope
to leave the city, Mr. Lorry went out in quest of such a lodging, and
found a suitable one, high up in a removed by-street where the closed
blinds in all the other windows of a high melancholy square of buildings
marked deserted homes.

To this lodging he at once removed Lucie and her child, and Miss
Pross:  giving them what comfort he could, and much more than he had
himself.  He left Jerry with them, as a figure to fill a doorway that
would bear considerable knocking on the head, and retained to his own
occupations.  A disturbed and doleful mind he brought to bear upon them,
and slowly and heavily the day lagged on with him.

It wore itself out, and wore him out with it, until the Bank closed.
He was again alone in his room of the previous night, considering
what to do next, when he heard a foot upon the stair.  In a few
moments, a man stood in his presence, who, with a keenly observant
look at him, addressed him by his name.

"Your servant," said Mr. Lorry.  "Do you know me?"

He was a strongly made man with dark curling hair, from forty-five to
fifty years of age.  For answer he repeated, without any change of
emphasis, the words:

"Do you know me?"

"I have seen you somewhere."

"Perhaps at my wine-shop?"

Much interested and agitated, Mr. Lorry said:  "You come from Doctor
Manette?"

"Yes.  I come from Doctor Manette."

"And what says he?  What does he send me?"

Defarge gave into his anxious hand, an open scrap of paper.  It bore
the words in the Doctor's writing:

    "Charles is safe, but I cannot safely leave this place yet.
     I have obtained the favour that the bearer has a short note
     from Charles to his wife.  Let the bearer see his wife."

It was dated from La Force, within an hour.

"Will you accompany me," said Mr. Lorry, joyfully relieved after
reading this note aloud, "to where his wife resides?"

"Yes," returned Defarge.

Scarcely noticing as yet, in what a curiously reserved and mechanical
way Defarge spoke, Mr. Lorry put on his hat and they went down into
the courtyard.  There, they found two women; one, knitting.

"Madame Defarge, surely!" said Mr. Lorry, who had left her in exactly
the same attitude some seventeen years ago.

"It is she," observed her husband.

"Does Madame go with us?" inquired Mr. Lorry, seeing that she moved
as they moved.

"Yes.  That she may be able to recognise the faces and know the persons.
It is for their safety."

Beginning to be struck by Defarge's manner, Mr. Lorry looked
dubiously at him, and led the way.  Both the women followed; the
second woman being The Vengeance.

They passed through the intervening streets as quickly as they might,
ascended the staircase of the new domicile, were admitted by Jerry,
and found Lucie weeping, alone.  She was thrown into a transport by
the tidings Mr. Lorry gave her of her husband, and clasped the hand
that delivered his note--little thinking what it had been doing near
him in the night, and might, but for a chance, have done to him.

     "DEAREST,--Take courage.  I am well, and your father has
      influence around me.  You cannot answer this.
      Kiss our child for me."

That was all the writing.  It was so much, however, to her who
received it, that she turned from Defarge to his wife, and kissed one
of the hands that knitted.  It was a passionate, loving, thankful,
womanly action, but the hand made no response--dropped cold and
heavy, and took to its knitting again.

There was something in its touch that gave Lucie a check.
She stopped in the act of putting the note in her bosom, and,
with her hands yet at her neck, looked terrified at Madame Defarge.
Madame Defarge met the lifted eyebrows and forehead with a cold,
impassive stare.

"My dear," said Mr. Lorry, striking in to explain; "there are
frequent risings in the streets; and, although it is not likely they
will ever trouble you, Madame Defarge wishes to see those whom she
has the power to protect at such times, to the end that she may know
them--that she may identify them.  I believe," said Mr. Lorry,
rather halting in his reassuring words, as the stony manner of all
the three impressed itself upon him more and more, "I state the case,
Citizen Defarge?"

Defarge looked gloomily at his wife, and gave no other answer than a
gruff sound of acquiescence.

"You had better, Lucie," said Mr. Lorry, doing all he could to
propitiate, by tone and manner, "have the dear child here, and our
good Pross.  Our good Pross, Defarge, is an English lady, and knows
no French."

The lady in question, whose rooted conviction that she was more than
a match for any foreigner, was not to be shaken by distress and,
danger, appeared with folded arms, and observed in English to The
Vengeance, whom her eyes first encountered, "Well, I am sure, Boldface!
I hope YOU are pretty well!"  She also bestowed a British cough on
Madame Defarge; but, neither of the two took much heed of her.

"Is that his child?" said Madame Defarge, stopping in her work for
the first time, and pointing her knitting-needle at little Lucie as
if it were the finger of Fate.

"Yes, madame," answered Mr. Lorry; "this is our poor prisoner's
darling daughter, and only child."

The shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed to fall
so threatening and dark on the child, that her mother instinctively
kneeled on the ground beside her, and held her to her breast.  The
shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed then to fall,
threatening and dark, on both the mother and the child.

"It is enough, my husband," said Madame Defarge.  "I have seen them.
We may go."

But, the suppressed manner had enough of menace in it--not visible
and presented, but indistinct and withheld--to alarm Lucie into
saying, as she laid her appealing hand on Madame Defarge's dress:

"You will be good to my poor husband.  You will do him no harm.
You will help me to see him if you can?"

"Your husband is not my business here," returned Madame Defarge,
looking down at her with perfect composure.  "It is the daughter of
your father who is my business here."

"For my sake, then, be merciful to my husband.  For my child's sake!
She will put her hands together and pray you to be merciful.  We are
more afraid of you than of these others."

Madame Defarge received it as a compliment, and looked at her
husband.  Defarge, who had been uneasily biting his thumb-nail and
looking at her, collected his face into a sterner expression.

"What is it that your husband says in that little letter?"  asked
Madame Defarge, with a lowering smile.  "Influence; he says something
touching influence?"

"That my father," said Lucie, hurriedly taking the paper from her
breast, but with her alarmed eyes on her questioner and not on it,
"has much influence around him."

"Surely it will release him!" said Madame Defarge.  "Let it do so."

"As a wife and mother," cried Lucie, most earnestly, "I implore you
to have pity on me and not to exercise any power that you possess,
against my innocent husband, but to use it in his behalf.
O sister-woman, think of me.  As a wife and mother!"

Madame Defarge looked, coldly as ever, at the suppliant, and said,
turning to her friend The Vengeance:

"The wives and mothers we have been used to see, since we were as
little as this child, and much less, have not been greatly
considered?  We have known THEIR husbands and fathers laid in prison
and kept from them, often enough?  All our lives, we have seen our
sister-women suffer, in themselves and in their children, poverty,
nakedness, hunger, thirst, sickness, misery, oppression and neglect
of all kinds?"

"We have seen nothing else," returned The Vengeance.

"We have borne this a long time," said Madame Defarge, turning her
eyes again upon Lucie.  "Judge you!  Is it likely that the trouble of
one wife and mother would be much to us now?"

She resumed her knitting and went out.  The Vengeance followed.
Defarge went last, and closed the door.

"Courage, my dear Lucie," said Mr. Lorry, as he raised her.
"Courage, courage!  So far all goes well with us--much, much better
than it has of late gone with many poor souls.  Cheer up, and have a
thankful heart."

"I am not thankless, I hope, but that dreadful woman seems to throw a
shadow on me and on all my hopes."

"Tut, tut!" said Mr. Lorry; "what is this despondency in the brave
little breast?  A shadow indeed!  No substance in it, Lucie."

But the shadow of the manner of these Defarges was dark upon himself,
for all that, and in his secret mind it troubled him greatly.



IV

Calm in Storm


Doctor Manette did not return until the morning of the fourth day of
his absence.  So much of what had happened in that dreadful time as
could be kept from the knowledge of Lucie was so well concealed from
her, that not until long afterwards, when France and she were far apart,
did she know that eleven hundred defenceless prisoners of both sexes
and all ages had been killed by the populace; that four days and
nights had been darkened by this deed of horror; and that the air
around her had been tainted by the slain.  She only knew that there
had been an attack upon the prisons, that all political prisoners had
been in danger, and that some had been dragged out by the crowd and
murdered.

To Mr. Lorry, the Doctor communicated under an injunction of secrecy
on which he had no need to dwell, that the crowd had taken him
through a scene of carnage to the prison of La Force.  That, in the
prison he had found a self-appointed Tribunal sitting, before which
the prisoners were brought singly, and by which they were rapidly
ordered to be put forth to be massacred, or to be released, or (in a
few cases) to be sent back to their cells.  That, presented by his
conductors to this Tribunal, he had announced himself by name and
profession as having been for eighteen years a secret and unaccused
prisoner in the Bastille; that, one of the body so sitting in
judgment had risen and identified him, and that this man was Defarge.

That, hereupon he had ascertained, through the registers on the table,
that his son-in-law was among the living prisoners, and had pleaded
hard to the Tribunal--of whom some members were asleep and some awake,
some dirty with murder and some clean, some sober and some not--for
his life and liberty.  That, in the first frantic greetings lavished
on himself as a notable sufferer under the overthrown system, it had
been accorded to him to have Charles Darnay brought before the lawless
Court, and examined.  That, he seemed on the point of being at once
released, when the tide in his favour met with some unexplained check
(not intelligible to the Doctor), which led to a few words of secret
conference.  That, the man sitting as President had then informed
Doctor Manette that the prisoner must remain in custody, but should,
for his sake, be held inviolate in safe custody.  That, immediately,
on a signal, the prisoner was removed to the interior of the prison
again; but, that he, the Doctor, had then so strongly pleaded for
permission to remain and assure himself that his son-in-law was,
through no malice or mischance, delivered to the concourse whose
murderous yells outside the gate had often drowned the proceedings,
that he had obtained the permission, and had remained in that Hall of
Blood until the danger was over.

The sights he had seen there, with brief snatches of food and sleep
by intervals, shall remain untold.  The mad joy over the prisoners
who were saved, had astounded him scarcely less than the mad ferocity
against those who were cut to pieces.  One prisoner there was, he
said, who had been discharged into the street free, but at whom a
mistaken savage had thrust a pike as he passed out.  Being besought
to go to him and dress the wound, the Doctor had passed out at the
same gate, and had found him in the arms of a company of Samaritans,
who were seated on the bodies of their victims.  With an inconsistency
as monstrous as anything in this awful nightmare, they had helped the
healer, and tended the wounded man with the gentlest solicitude--
had made a litter for him and escorted him carefully from the spot--
had then caught up their weapons and plunged anew into a butchery so
dreadful, that the Doctor had covered his eyes with his hands, and
swooned away in the midst of it.

As Mr. Lorry received these confidences, and as he watched the face
of his friend now sixty-two years of age, a misgiving arose within
him that such dread experiences would revive the old danger.

But, he had never seen his friend in his present aspect:  he had never
at all known him in his present character.  For the first time the
Doctor felt, now, that his suffering was strength and power.  For the
first time he felt that in that sharp fire, he had slowly forged the
iron which could break the prison door of his daughter's husband, and
deliver him.  "It all tended to a good end, my friend; it was not
mere waste and ruin.  As my beloved child was helpful in restoring me
to myself, I will be helpful now in restoring the dearest part of
herself to her; by the aid of Heaven I will do it!"  Thus, Doctor
Manette.  And when Jarvis Lorry saw the kindled eyes, the resolute
face, the calm strong look and bearing of the man whose life always
seemed to him to have been stopped, like a clock, for so many years,
and then set going again with an energy which had lain dormant during
the cessation of its usefulness, he believed.

Greater things than the Doctor had at that time to contend with,
would have yielded before his persevering purpose.  While he kept
himself in his place, as a physician, whose business was with all
degrees of mankind, bond and free, rich and poor, bad and good, he
used his personal influence so wisely, that he was soon the inspecting
physician of three prisons, and among them of La Force.  He could now
assure Lucie that her husband was no longer confined alone, but was
mixed with the general body of prisoners; he saw her husband weekly,
and brought sweet messages to her, straight from his lips; sometimes
her husband himself sent a letter to her (though never by the Doctor's
hand), but she was not permitted to write to him:  for, among the many
wild suspicions of plots in the prisons, the wildest of all pointed
at emigrants who were known to have made friends or permanent
connections abroad.

This new life of the Doctor's was an anxious life, no doubt; still,
the sagacious Mr. Lorry saw that there was a new sustaining pride in it.
Nothing unbecoming tinged the pride; it was a natural and worthy one;
but he observed it as a curiosity.  The Doctor knew, that up to that
time, his imprisonment had been associated in the minds of his
daughter and his friend, with his personal affliction, deprivation,
and weakness.  Now that this was changed, and he knew himself to be
invested through that old trial with forces to which they both looked
for Charles's ultimate safety and deliverance, he became so far exalted
by the change, that he took the lead and direction, and required them
as the weak, to trust to him as the strong.  The preceding relative
positions of himself and Lucie were reversed, yet only as the
liveliest gratitude and affection could reverse them, for he could
have had no pride but in rendering some service to her who had
rendered so much to him.  "All curious to see," thought Mr. Lorry,
in his amiably shrewd way, "but all natural and right; so, take the
lead, my dear friend, and keep it; it couldn't be in better hands."

But, though the Doctor tried hard, and never ceased trying, to get
Charles Darnay set at liberty, or at least to get him brought to trial,
the public current of the time set too strong and fast for him.
The new era began; the king was tried, doomed, and beheaded; the
Republic of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, declared for
victory or death against the world in arms; the black flag waved
night and day from the great towers of Notre Dame; three hundred
thousand men, summoned to rise against the tyrants of the earth, rose
from all the varying soils of France, as if the dragon's teeth had
been sown broadcast, and had yielded fruit equally on hill and plain,
on rock, in gravel, and alluvial mud, under the bright sky of the
South and under the clouds of the North, in fell and forest, in the
vineyards and the olive-grounds and among the cropped grass and the
stubble of the corn, along the fruitful banks of the broad rivers,
and in the sand of the sea-shore.  What private solicitude could rear
itself against the deluge of the Year One of Liberty--the deluge
rising from below, not falling from above, and with the windows of
Heaven shut, not opened!

There was no pause, no pity, no peace, no interval of relenting rest,
no measurement of time.  Though days and nights circled as regularly
as when time was young, and the evening and morning were the first
day, other count of time there was none.  Hold of it was lost in the
raging fever of a nation, as it is in the fever of one patient.
Now, breaking the unnatural silence of a whole city, the executioner
showed the people the head of the king--and now, it seemed almost in
the same breath, the bead of his fair wife which had had eight weary
months of imprisoned widowhood and misery, to turn it grey.

And yet, observing the strange law of contradiction which obtains in
all such cases, the time was long, while it flamed by so fast.
A revolutionary tribunal in the capital, and forty or fifty thousand
revolutionary committees all over the land; a law of the Suspected,
which struck away all security for liberty or life, and delivered
over any good and innocent person to any bad and guilty one; prisons
gorged with people who had committed no offence, and could obtain no
hearing; these things became the established order and nature of
appointed things, and seemed to be ancient usage before they were
many weeks old.  Above all, one hideous figure grew as familiar as if
it had been before the general gaze from the foundations of the
world--the figure of the sharp female called La Guillotine.

It was the popular theme for jests; it was the best cure for
headache, it infallibly prevented the hair from turning grey, it
imparted a peculiar delicacy to the complexion, it was the National
Razor which shaved close:  who kissed La Guillotine, looked through
the little window and sneezed into the sack.  It was the sign of the
regeneration of the human race.  It superseded the Cross.  Models of
it were worn on breasts from which the Cross was discarded, and it
was bowed down to and believed in where the Cross was denied.

It sheared off heads so many, that it, and the ground it most
polluted, were a rotten red.  It was taken to pieces, like a
toy-puzzle for a young Devil, and was put together again when the
occasion wanted it.  It hushed the eloquent, struck down the powerful,
abolished the beautiful and good.  Twenty-two friends of high public
mark, twenty-one living and one dead, it had lopped the heads off,
in one morning, in as many minutes.  The name of the strong man of
Old Scripture had descended to the chief functionary who worked it;
but, so armed, he was stronger than his namesake, and blinder, and
tore away the gates of God's own Temple every day.

Among these terrors, and the brood belonging to them, the Doctor
walked with a steady head:  confident in his power, cautiously
persistent in his end, never doubting that he would save Lucie's
husband at last. Yet the current of the time swept by, so strong and
deep, and carried the time away so fiercely, that Charles had lain in
prison one year and three months when the Doctor was thus steady and
confident.  So much more wicked and distracted had the Revolution
grown in that December month, that the rivers of the South were
encumbered with the bodies of the violently drowned by night, and
prisoners were shot in lines and squares under the southern wintry sun.
Still, the Doctor walked among the terrors with a steady head.
No man better known than he, in Paris at that day; no man in a
stranger situation.  Silent, humane, indispensable in hospital and
prison, using his art equally among assassins and victims, he was a
man apart.  In the exercise of his skill, the appearance and the
story of the Bastille Captive removed him from all other men.  He was
not suspected or brought in question, any more than if he bad indeed
been recalled to life some eighteen years before, or were a Spirit
moving among mortals.



V

The Wood-Sawyer


One year and three months.  During all that time Lucie was never
sure, from hour to hour, but that the Guillotine would strike off her
husband's head next day.  Every day, through the stony streets, the
tumbrils now jolted heavily, filled with Condemned.  Lovely girls;
bright women, brown-haired, black-haired, and grey; youths; stalwart
men and old; gentle born and peasant born; all red wine for La
Guillotine, all daily brought into light from the dark cellars of the
loathsome prisons, and carried to her through the streets to slake
her devouring thirst.  Liberty, equality, fraternity, or death;--the
last, much the easiest to bestow, O Guillotine!

If the suddenness of her calamity, and the whirling wheels of the
time, had stunned the Doctor's daughter into awaiting the result in
idle despair, it would but have been with her as it was with many.
But, from the hour when she had taken the white head to her fresh
young bosom in the garret of Saint Antoine, she had been true to her
duties.  She was truest to them in the season of trial, as all the
quietly loyal and good will always be.

As soon as they were established in their new residence, and her
father had entered on the routine of his avocations, she arranged the
little household as exactly as if her husband had been there.
Everything had its appointed place and its appointed time.  Little
Lucie she taught, as regularly, as if they had all been united in
their English home.  The slight devices with which she cheated
herself into the show of a belief that they would soon be reunited--
the little preparations for his speedy return, the setting aside of
his chair and his books--these, and the solemn prayer at night for
one dear prisoner especially, among the many unhappy souls in prison
and the shadow of death--were almost the only outspoken reliefs of
her heavy mind.

She did not greatly alter in appearance.  The plain dark dresses,
akin to mourning dresses, which she and her child wore, were as neat
and as well attended to as the brighter clothes of happy days.
She lost her colour, and the old and intent expression was a constant,
not an occasional, thing; otherwise, she remained very pretty and
comely.  Sometimes, at night on kissing her father, she would burst
into the grief she had repressed all day, and would say that her sole
reliance, under Heaven, was on him.  He always resolutely answered:
"Nothing can happen to him without my knowledge, and I know that I
can save him, Lucie."

They had not made the round of their changed life many weeks,
when her father said to her, on coming home one evening:

"My dear, there is an upper window in the prison, to which Charles
can sometimes gain access at three in the afternoon.  When he can get
to it--which depends on many uncertainties and incidents--he might
see you in the street, he thinks, if you stood in a certain place
that I can show you.  But you will not be able to see him, my poor
child, and even if you could, it would be unsafe for you to make a
sign of recognition."

"O show me the place, my father, and I will go there every day."

From that time, in all weathers, she waited there two hours.
As the clock struck two, she was there, and at four she turned
resignedly away. When it was not too wet or inclement for her child
to be with her, they went together; at other times she was alone;
but, she never missed a single day.

It was the dark and dirty corner of a small winding street.
The hovel of a cutter of wood into lengths for burning, was the only
house at that end; all else was wall.  On the third day of her being
there, he noticed her.

"Good day, citizeness."

"Good day, citizen."

This mode of address was now prescribed by decree.  It had been
established voluntarily some time ago, among the more thorough
patriots; but, was now law for everybody.

"Walking here again, citizeness?"

"You see me, citizen!"

The wood-sawyer, who was a little man with a redundancy of gesture
(he had once been a mender of roads), cast a glance at the prison,
pointed at the prison, and putting his ten fingers before his face to
represent bars, peeped through them jocosely.

"But it's not my business," said he.  And went on sawing his wood.

Next day he was looking out for her, and accosted her the moment she
appeared.

"What?  Walking here again, citizeness?"

"Yes, citizen."

"Ah!  A child too!  Your mother, is it not, my little citizeness?"

"Do I say yes, mamma?" whispered little Lucie, drawing close to her.

"Yes, dearest."

"Yes, citizen."

"Ah!  But it's not my business.  My work is my business.  See my saw!
I call it my Little Guillotine.  La, la, la; La, la, la!  And off his
head comes!"

The billet fell as he spoke, and he threw it into a basket.

"I call myself the Samson of the firewood guillotine.  See here again!
Loo, loo, loo; Loo, loo, loo!  And off HER head comes!  Now, a child.
Tickle, tickle; Pickle, pickle!  And off ITS head comes.  All the family!"

Lucie shuddered as he threw two more billets into his basket, but it
was impossible to be there while the wood-sawyer was at work, and not
be in his sight.  Thenceforth, to secure his good will, she always
spoke to him first, and often gave him drink-money, which he readily
received.

He was an inquisitive fellow, and sometimes when she had quite
forgotten him in gazing at the prison roof and grates, and in lifting
her heart up to her husband, she would come to herself to find him
looking at her, with his knee on his bench and his saw stopped in its
work.  "But it's not my business!" he would generally say at those
times, and would briskly fall to his sawing again.

In all weathers, in the snow and frost of winter, in the bitter winds
of spring, in the hot sunshine of summer, in the rains of autumn, and
again in the snow and frost of winter, Lucie passed two hours of
every day at this place; and every day on leaving it, she kissed the
prison wall.  Her husband saw her (so she learned from her father) it
might be once in five or six times:  it might be twice or thrice running:
it might be, not for a week or a fortnight together.  It was enough
that he could and did see her when the chances served, and on that
possibility she would have waited out the day, seven days a week.

These occupations brought her round to the December month, wherein
her father walked among the terrors with a steady head.  On a
lightly-snowing afternoon she arrived at the usual corner.  It was a
day of some wild rejoicing, and a festival.  She had seen the houses,
as she came along, decorated with little pikes, and with little red
caps stuck upon them; also, with tricoloured ribbons; also, with the
standard inscription (tricoloured letters were the favourite),
Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!

The miserable shop of the wood-sawyer was so small, that its whole
surface furnished very indifferent space for this legend.  He had got
somebody to scrawl it up for him, however, who had squeezed Death in
with most inappropriate difficulty.  On his house-top, he displayed
pike and cap, as a good citizen must, and in a window he had
stationed his saw inscribed as his "Little Sainte Guillotine"--
for the great sharp female was by that time popularly canonised.
His shop was shut and he was not there, which was a relief to Lucie,
and left her quite alone.

But, he was not far off, for presently she heard a troubled movement
and a shouting coming along, which filled her with fear.  A moment
afterwards, and a throng of people came pouring round the corner by
the prison wall, in the midst of whom was the wood-sawyer hand in
hand with The Vengeance.  There could not be fewer than five hundred
people, and they were dancing like five thousand demons.  There was
no other music than their own singing.  They danced to the popular
Revolution song, keeping a ferocious time that was like a gnashing of
teeth in unison.  Men and women danced together, women danced
together, men danced together, as hazard had brought them together.
At first, they were a mere storm of coarse red caps and coarse
woollen rags; but, as they filled the place, and stopped to dance
about Lucie, some ghastly apparition of a dance-figure gone raving
mad arose among them.  They advanced, retreated, struck at one
another's hands, clutched at one another's heads, spun round alone,
caught one another and spun round in pairs, until many of them
dropped.  While those were down, the rest linked hand in hand, and
all spun round together:  then the ring broke, and in separate rings
of two and four they turned and turned until they all stopped at
once, began again, struck, clutched, and tore, and then reversed the
spin, and all spun round another way.  Suddenly they stopped again,
paused, struck out the time afresh, formed into lines the width of
the public way, and, with their heads low down and their hands high
up, swooped screaming off.  No fight could have been half so terrible
as this dance.  It was so emphatically a fallen sport--a something,
once innocent, delivered over to all devilry--a healthy pastime
changed into a means of angering the blood, bewildering the senses,
and steeling the heart.  Such grace as was visible in it, made it the
uglier, showing how warped and perverted all things good by nature
were become.  The maidenly bosom bared to this, the pretty
almost-child's head thus distracted, the delicate foot mincing in
this slough of blood and dirt, were types of the disjointed time.

This was the Carmagnole.  As it passed, leaving Lucie frightened and
bewildered in the doorway of the wood-sawyer's house, the feathery
snow fell as quietly and lay as white and soft, as if it had never been.

"O my father!" for he stood before her when she lifted up the eyes
she had momentarily darkened with her hand; "such a cruel, bad sight."

"I know, my dear, I know.  I have seen it many times.  Don't be
frightened!  Not one of them would harm you."

"I am not frightened for myself, my father.  But when I think of my
husband, and the mercies of these people--"

"We will set him above their mercies very soon.  I left him climbing
to the window, and I came to tell you.  There is no one here to see.
You may kiss your hand towards that highest shelving roof."

"I do so, father, and I send him my Soul with it!"

"You cannot see him, my poor dear?"

"No, father," said Lucie, yearning and weeping as she kissed her hand,
"no."

A footstep in the snow.  Madame Defarge.  "I salute you, citizeness,"
from the Doctor.  "I salute you, citizen."  This in passing.  Nothing
more. Madame Defarge gone, like a shadow over the white road.

"Give me your arm, my love.  Pass from here with an air of cheerfulness
and courage, for his sake.  That was well done;" they had left the spot;
"it shall not be in vain.  Charles is summoned for to-morrow."

"For to-morrow!"

"There is no time to lose.  I am well prepared, but there are
precautions to be taken, that could not be taken until he was actually
summoned before the Tribunal.  He has not received the notice yet,
but I know that he will presently be summoned for to-morrow, and
removed to the Conciergerie; I have timely information.
You are not afraid?"

She could scarcely answer, "I trust in you."

"Do so, implicitly.  Your suspense is nearly ended, my darling; he
shall be restored to you within a few hours; I have encompassed him
with every protection.  I must see Lorry."

He stopped.  There was a heavy lumbering of wheels within hearing.
They both knew too well what it meant.  One.  Two.  Three.  Three
tumbrils faring away with their dread loads over the hushing snow.

"I must see Lorry," the Doctor repeated, turning her another way.

The staunch old gentleman was still in his trust; had never left it.
He and his books were in frequent requisition as to property
confiscated and made national.  What he could save for the owners, he
saved.  No better man living to hold fast by what Tellson's had in
keeping, and to hold his peace.

A murky red and yellow sky, and a rising mist from the Seine, denoted
the approach of darkness.  It was almost dark when they arrived at
the Bank.  The stately residence of Monseigneur was altogether
blighted and deserted.  Above a heap of dust and ashes in the court,
ran the letters:  National Property.  Republic One and Indivisible.
Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!

Who could that be with Mr. Lorry--the owner of the riding-coat upon
the chair--who must not be seen?  From whom newly arrived, did he come
out, agitated and surprised, to take his favourite in his arms?  To
whom did he appear to repeat her faltering words, when, raising his
voice and turning his head towards the door of the room from which he
had issued, he said:  "Removed to the Conciergerie, and summoned for
to-morrow?"



VI

Triumph


The dread tribunal of five Judges, Public Prosecutor, and determined
Jury, sat every day.  Their lists went forth every evening, and were
read out by the gaolers of the various prisons to their prisoners.
The standard gaoler-joke was, "Come out and listen to the Evening Paper,
you inside there!"

"Charles Evremonde, called Darnay!"

So at last began the Evening Paper at La Force.

When a name was called, its owner stepped apart into a spot reserved
for those who were announced as being thus fatally recorded.  Charles
Evremonde, called Darnay, had reason to know the usage; he had seen
hundreds pass away so.

His bloated gaoler, who wore spectacles to read with, glanced over
them to assure himself that he had taken his place, and went through
the list, making a similar short pause at each name.  There were
twenty-three names, but only twenty were responded to; for one of the
prisoners so summoned had died in gaol and been forgotten, and two
had already been guillotined and forgotten.  The list was read, in
the vaulted chamber where Darnay had seen the associated prisoners on
the night of his arrival.  Every one of those had perished in the
massacre; every human creature he had since cared for and parted with,
had died on the scaffold.

There were hurried words of farewell and kindness, but the parting
was soon over.  It was the incident of every day, and the society of
La Force were engaged in the preparation of some games of forfeits
and a little concert, for that evening.  They crowded to the grates
and shed tears there; but, twenty places in the projected
entertainments had to be refilled, and the time was, at best, short
to the lock-up hour, when the common rooms and corridors would be
delivered over to the great dogs who kept watch there through the
night.  The prisoners were far from insensible or unfeeling; their
ways arose out of the condition of the time.  Similarly, though with
a subtle difference, a species of fervour or intoxication, known,
without doubt, to have led some persons to brave the guillotine
unnecessarily, and to die by it, was not mere boastfulness, but a
wild infection of the wildly shaken public mind.  In seasons of
pestilence, some of us will have a secret attraction to the disease--
a terrible passing inclination to die of it.  And all of us have like
wonders hidden in our breasts, only needing circumstances to evoke them.

The passage to the Conciergerie was short and dark; the night in its
vermin-haunted cells was long and cold.  Next day, fifteen prisoners
were put to the bar before Charles Darnay's name was called.  All the
fifteen were condemned, and the trials of the whole occupied an hour
and a half.

"Charles Evremonde, called Darnay," was at length arraigned.

His judges sat upon the Bench in feathered hats; but the rough red
cap and tricoloured cockade was the head-dress otherwise prevailing.
Looking at the Jury and the turbulent audience, he might have thought
that the usual order of things was reversed, and that the felons were
trying the honest men.  The lowest, cruelest, and worst populace of a
city, never without its quantity of low, cruel, and bad, were the
directing spirits of the scene:  noisily commenting, applauding,
disapproving, anticipating, and precipitating the result, without a
check.  Of the men, the greater part were armed in various ways; of
the women, some wore knives, some daggers, some ate and drank as they
looked on, many knitted.  Among these last, was one, with a spare
piece of knitting under her arm as she worked.  She was in a front
row, by the side of a man whom he had never seen since his arrival at
the Barrier, but whom he directly remembered as Defarge.  He noticed
that she once or twice whispered in his ear, and that she seemed to
be his wife; but, what he most noticed in the two figures was, that
although they were posted as close to himself as they could be, they
never looked towards him.  They seemed to be waiting for something
with a dogged determination, and they looked at the Jury, but at
nothing else.  Under the President sat Doctor Manette, in his usual
quiet dress.  As well as the prisoner could see, he and Mr. Lorry
were the only men there, unconnected with the Tribunal, who wore their
usual clothes, and had not assumed the coarse garb of the Carmagnole.

Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, was accused by the public
prosecutor as an emigrant, whose life was forfeit to the Republic,
under the decree which banished all emigrants on pain of Death.
It was nothing that the decree bore date since his return to France.
There he was, and there was the decree; he had been taken in France,
and his head was demanded.

"Take off his head!" cried the audience.  "An enemy to the Republic!"

The President rang his bell to silence those cries, and asked the
prisoner whether it was not true that he had lived many years in England?

Undoubtedly it was.

Was he not an emigrant then?  What did he call himself?

Not an emigrant, he hoped, within the sense and spirit of the law.

Why not?  the President desired to know.

Because he had voluntarily relinquished a title that was distasteful
to him, and a station that was distasteful to him, and had left his
country--he submitted before the word emigrant in the present
acceptation by the Tribunal was in use--to live by his own industry
in England, rather than on the industry of the overladen people of
France.

What proof had he of this?

He handed in the names of two witnesses; Theophile Gabelle, and
Alexandre Manette.

But he had married in England?  the President reminded him.

True, but not an English woman.

A citizeness of France?

Yes.  By birth.

Her name and family?

"Lucie Manette, only daughter of Doctor Manette, the good physician
who sits there."

This answer had a happy effect upon the audience.  Cries in
exaltation of the well-known good physician rent the hall.  So
capriciously were the people moved, that tears immediately rolled
down several ferocious countenances which had been glaring at the
prisoner a moment before, as if with impatience to pluck him out into
the streets and kill him.

On these few steps of his dangerous way, Charles Darnay had set his
foot according to Doctor Manette's reiterated instructions.  The same
cautious counsel directed every step that lay before him, and had
prepared every inch of his road.

The President asked, why had he returned to France when he did,
and not sooner?

He had not returned sooner, he replied, simply because he had no
means of living in France, save those he had resigned; whereas, in
England, he lived by giving instruction in the French language and
literature. He had returned when he did, on the pressing and written
entreaty of a French citizen, who represented that his life was
endangered by his absence.  He had come back, to save a citizen's life,
and to bear his testimony, at whatever personal hazard, to the truth.
Was that criminal in the eyes of the Republic?

The populace cried enthusiastically, "No!" and the President rang his
bell to quiet them.  Which it did not, for they continued to cry
"No!" until they left off, of their own will.

The President required the name of that citizen.  The accused
explained that the citizen was his first witness.  He also referred
with confidence to the citizen's letter, which had been taken from
him at the Barrier, but which he did not doubt would be found among
the papers then before the President.

The Doctor had taken care that it should be there--had assured him
that it would be there--and at this stage of the proceedings it was
produced and read.  Citizen Gabelle was called to confirm it, and did
so. Citizen Gabelle hinted, with infinite delicacy and politeness,
that in the pressure of business imposed on the Tribunal by the
multitude of enemies of the Republic with which it had to deal, he
had been slightly overlooked in his prison of the Abbaye--in fact,
had rather passed out of the Tribunal's patriotic remembrance--until
three days ago; when he had been summoned before it, and had been set
at liberty on the Jury's declaring themselves satisfied that the
accusation against him was answered, as to himself, by the surrender
of the citizen Evremonde, called Darnay.

Doctor Manette was next questioned.  His high personal popularity,
and the clearness of his answers, made a great impression; but, as he
proceeded, as he showed that the Accused was his first friend on his
release from his long imprisonment; that, the accused had remained in
England, always faithful and devoted to his daughter and himself in
their exile; that, so far from being in favour with the Aristocrat
government there, he had actually been tried for his life by it, as
the foe of England and friend of the United States--as he brought
these circumstances into view, with the greatest discretion and with
the straightforward force of truth and earnestness, the Jury and the
populace became one.  At last, when he appealed by name to Monsieur
Lorry, an English gentleman then and there present, who, like himself,
had been a witness on that English trial and could corroborate his
account of it, the Jury declared that they had heard enough, and that
they were ready with their votes if the President were content to
receive them.

At every vote (the Jurymen voted aloud and individually), the
populace set up a shout of applause.  All the voices were in the
prisoner's favour, and the President declared him free.

Then, began one of those extraordinary scenes with which the populace
sometimes gratified their fickleness, or their better impulses
towards generosity and mercy, or which they regarded as some set-off
against their swollen account of cruel rage.  No man can decide now
to which of these motives such extraordinary scenes were referable;
it is probable, to a blending of all the three, with the second
predominating.  No sooner was the acquittal pronounced, than tears
were shed as freely as blood at another time, and such fraternal
embraces were bestowed upon the prisoner by as many of both sexes as
could rush at him, that after his long and unwholesome confinement he
was in danger of fainting from exhaustion; none the less because he
knew very well, that the very same people, carried by another current,
would have rushed at him with the very same intensity, to rend him to
pieces and strew him over the streets.

His removal, to make way for other accused persons who were to be
tried, rescued him from these caresses for the moment.  Five were to
be tried together, next, as enemies of the Republic, forasmuch as
they had not assisted it by word or deed.  So quick was the Tribunal
to compensate itself and the nation for a chance lost, that these
five came down to him before he left the place, condemned to die
within twenty-four hours. The first of them told him so, with the
customary prison sign of Death--a raised finger--and they all added
in words, "Long live the Republic!"

The five had had, it is true, no audience to lengthen their
proceedings, for when he and Doctor Manette emerged from the gate,
there was a great crowd about it, in which there seemed to be every
face he had seen in Court--except two, for which he looked in vain.
On his coming out, the concourse made at him anew, weeping,
embracing, and shouting, all by turns and all together, until the
very tide of the river on the bank of which the mad scene was acted,
seemed to run mad, like the people on the shore.

They put him into a great chair they had among them, and which they
had taken either out of the Court itself, or one of its rooms or
passages.  Over the chair they had thrown a red flag, and to the back
of it they had bound a pike with a red cap on its top.  In this car
of triumph, not even the Doctor's entreaties could prevent his being
carried to his home on men's shoulders, with a confused sea of red
caps heaving about him, and casting up to sight from the stormy deep
such wrecks of faces, that he more than once misdoubted his mind
being in confusion, and that he was in the tumbril on his way to the
Guillotine.

In wild dreamlike procession, embracing whom they met and pointing
him out, they carried him on.  Reddening the snowy streets with the
prevailing Republican colour, in winding and tramping through them,
as they had reddened them below the snow with a deeper dye, they
carried him thus into the courtyard of the building where he lived.
Her father had gone on before, to prepare her, and when her husband
stood upon his feet, she dropped insensible in his arms.

As he held her to his heart and turned her beautiful head between his
face and the brawling crowd, so that his tears and her lips might
come together unseen, a few of the people fell to dancing. Instantly,
all the rest fell to dancing, and the courtyard overflowed with the
Carmagnole. Then, they elevated into the vacant chair a young woman
from the crowd to be carried as the Goddess of Liberty, and then
swelling and overflowing out into the adjacent streets, and along the
river's bank, and over the bridge, the Carmagnole absorbed them every
one and whirled them away.

After grasping the Doctor's hand, as he stood victorious and proud
before him; after grasping the hand of Mr. Lorry, who came panting in
breathless from his struggle against the waterspout of the Carmagnole;
after kissing little Lucie, who was lifted up to clasp her arms round
his neck; and after embracing the ever zealous and faithful Pross who
lifted her; he took his wife in his arms, and carried her up to their
rooms.

"Lucie!  My own!  I am safe."

"O dearest Charles, let me thank God for this on my knees as I have
prayed to Him."

They all reverently bowed their heads and hearts.  When she was again
in his arms, he said to her:

"And now speak to your father, dearest.  No other man in all this
France could have done what he has done for me."

She laid her head upon her father's breast, as she had laid his poor
head on her own breast, long, long ago.  He was happy in the return
he had made her, he was recompensed for his suffering, be was proud
of his strength.  "You must not be weak, my darling," he remonstrated;
"don't tremble so.  I have saved him."



VII

A Knock at the Door


"I have saved him."  It was not another of the dreams in which he had
often come back; he was really here.  And yet his wife trembled, and
a vague but heavy fear was upon her.

All the air round was so thick and dark, the people were so
passionately revengeful and fitful, the innocent were so constantly
put to death on vague suspicion and black malice, it was so
impossible to forget that many as blameless as her husband and as
dear to others as he was to her, every day shared the fate from which
he had been clutched, that her heart could not be as lightened of its
load as she felt it ought to be.  The shadows of the wintry afternoon
were beginning to fall, and even now the dreadful carts were rolling
through the streets.  Her mind pursued them, looking for him among
the Condemned; and then she clung closer to his real presence and
trembled more.

Her father, cheering her, showed a compassionate superiority to this
woman's weakness, which was wonderful to see.  No garret, no shoemaking,
no One Hundred and Five, North Tower, now!  He had accomplished the
task he had set himself, his promise was redeemed, he had saved Charles.
Let them all lean upon him.

Their housekeeping was of a very frugal kind:  not only because that
was the safest way of life, involving the least offence to the
people, but because they were not rich, and Charles, throughout his
imprisonment, had had to pay heavily for his bad food, and for his
guard, and towards the living of the poorer prisoners.  Partly on
this account, and partly to avoid a domestic spy, they kept no
servant; the citizen and citizeness who acted as porters at the
courtyard gate, rendered them occasional service; and Jerry (almost
wholly transferred to them by Mr. Lorry) had become their daily
retainer, and had his bed there every night.

It was an ordinance of the Republic One and Indivisible of Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity, or Death, that on the door or doorpost of every
house, the name of every inmate must be legibly inscribed in letters
of a certain size, at a certain convenient height from the ground.
Mr. Jerry Cruncher's name, therefore, duly embellished the doorpost
down below; and, as the afternoon shadows deepened, the owner of that
name himself appeared, from overlooking a painter whom Doctor Manette
had employed to add to the list the name of Charles Evremonde, called
Darnay.

In the universal fear and distrust that darkened the time, all the
usual harmless ways of life were changed.  In the Doctor's little
household, as in very many others, the articles of daily consumption
that were wanted were purchased every evening, in small quantities
and at various small shops.  To avoid attracting notice, and to give
as little occasion as possible for talk and envy, was the general desire.

For some months past, Miss Pross and Mr. Cruncher had discharged the
office of purveyors; the former carrying the money; the latter, the
basket.  Every afternoon at about the time when the public lamps were
lighted, they fared forth on this duty, and made and brought home
such purchases as were needful.  Although Miss Pross, through her
long association with a French family, might have known as much of
their language as of her own, if she had had a mind, she had no mind
in that direction; consequently she knew no more of that "nonsense"
(as she was pleased to call it) than Mr. Cruncher did.  So her
manner of marketing was to plump a noun-substantive at the head of a
shopkeeper without any introduction in the nature of an article, and,
if it happened not to be the name of the thing she wanted, to look
round for that thing, lay hold of it, and hold on by it until the
bargain was concluded.  She always made a bargain for it, by holding
up, as a statement of its just price, one finger less than the merchant
held up, whatever his number might be.

"Now, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whose eyes were red with
felicity; "if you are ready, I am."

Jerry hoarsely professed himself at Miss Pross's service.  He had worn
all his rust off long ago, but nothing would file his spiky head down.

"There's all manner of things wanted," said Miss Pross, "and we shall
have a precious time of it.  We want wine, among the rest.
Nice toasts these Redheads will be drinking, wherever we buy it."

"It will be much the same to your knowledge, miss, I should think,"
retorted Jerry, "whether they drink your health or the Old Un's."

"Who's he?" said Miss Pross.

Mr. Cruncher, with some diffidence, explained himself as meaning "Old
Nick's."

"Ha!" said Miss Pross, "it doesn't need an interpreter to explain the
meaning of these creatures.  They have but one, and it's Midnight
Murder, and Mischief."

"Hush, dear!  Pray, pray, be cautious!" cried Lucie.

"Yes, yes, yes, I'll be cautious," said Miss Pross; "but I may say
among ourselves, that I do hope there will be no oniony and tobaccoey
smotherings in the form of embracings all round, going on in the
streets.  Now, Ladybird, never you stir from that fire till I come
back!  Take care of the dear husband you have recovered, and don't
move your pretty head from his shoulder as you have it now, till you
see me again!  May I ask a question, Doctor Manette, before I go?"

"I think you may take that liberty," the Doctor answered, smiling.

"For gracious sake, don't talk about Liberty; we have quite enough of
that," said Miss Pross.

"Hush, dear!  Again?" Lucie remonstrated.

"Well, my sweet," said Miss Pross, nodding her head emphatically,
"the short and the long of it is, that I am a subject of His Most
Gracious Majesty King George the Third;" Miss Pross curtseyed at the
name; "and as such, my maxim is, Confound their politics, Frustrate
their knavish tricks, On him our hopes we fix, God save the King!"

Mr. Cruncher, in an access of loyalty, growlingly repeated the words
after Miss Pross, Re somebody at church.

"I am glad you have so much of the Englishman in you, though I wish
you had never taken that cold in your voice," said Miss Pross,
approvingly.  "But the question, Doctor Manette.  Is there"--it was
the good creature's way to affect to make light of anything that was
a great anxiety with them all, and to come at it in this chance
manner--"is there any prospect yet, of our getting out of this place?"

"I fear not yet.  It would be dangerous for Charles yet."

"Heigh-ho-hum!" said Miss Pross, cheerfully repressing a sigh as she
glanced at her darling's golden hair in the light of the fire,
"then we must have patience and wait:  that's all.  We must hold up
our heads and fight low, as my brother Solomon used to say.
Now, Mr. Cruncher!--Don't you move, Ladybird!"

They went out, leaving Lucie, and her husband, her father, and the
child, by a bright fire.  Mr. Lorry was expected back presently from
the Banking House.  Miss Pross had lighted the lamp, but had put it
aside in a corner, that they might enjoy the fire-light undisturbed.
Little Lucie sat by her grandfather with her hands clasped through
his arm:  and he, in a tone not rising much above a whisper, began to
ten her a story of a great and powerful Fairy who had opened a
prison-wall and let out a captive who had once done the Fairy a
service.  All was subdued and quiet, and Lucie was more at ease than
she had been.

"What is that?" she cried, all at once.

"My dear!" said her father, stopping in his story, and laying his
hand on hers, "command yourself.  What a disordered state you are in!
The least thing--nothing--startles you!  YOU, your father's daughter!"

"I thought, my father," said Lucie, excusing herself, with a pale face
and in a faltering voice, "that I heard strange feet upon the stairs."

"My love, the staircase is as still as Death."

As he said the word, a blow was struck upon the door.

"Oh father, father.  What can this be!  Hide Charles.  Save him!"

"My child," said the Doctor, rising, and laying his hand upon her
shoulder, "I HAVE saved him.  What weakness is this, my dear!
Let me go to the door."

He took the lamp in his hand, crossed the two intervening outer
rooms, and opened it.  A rude clattering of feet over the floor,
and four rough men in red caps, armed with sabres and pistols,
entered the room.

"The Citizen Evremonde, called Darnay," said the first.

"Who seeks him?" answered Darnay.

"I seek him.  We seek him.  I know you, Evremonde; I saw you before
the Tribunal to-day.  You are again the prisoner of the Republic."

The four surrounded him, where he stood with his wife and child
clinging to him.

"Tell me how and why am I again a prisoner?"

"It is enough that you return straight to the Conciergerie, and will
know to-morrow.  You are summoned for to-morrow."

Doctor Manette, whom this visitation had so turned into stone, that
be stood with the lamp in his band, as if be woe a statue made to
hold it, moved after these words were spoken, put the lamp down, and
confronting the speaker, and taking him, not ungently, by the loose
front of his red woollen shirt, said:

"You know him, you have said.  Do you know me?"

"Yes, I know you, Citizen Doctor."

"We all know you, Citizen Doctor," said the other three.

He looked abstractedly from one to another, and said, in a lower
voice, after a pause:

"Will you answer his question to me then?  How does this happen?"

"Citizen Doctor," said the first, reluctantly, "he has been denounced
to the Section of Saint Antoine.  This citizen," pointing out the
second who had entered, "is from Saint Antoine."

The citizen here indicated nodded his head, and added:

"He is accused by Saint Antoine."

"Of what?" asked the Doctor.

"Citizen Doctor," said the first, with his former reluctance, "ask no
more.  If the Republic demands sacrifices from you, without doubt you
as a good patriot will be happy to make them.  The Republic goes
before all.  The People is supreme.  Evremonde, we are pressed."

"One word," the Doctor entreated.  "Will you tell me who denounced him?"

"It is against rule," answered the first; "but you can ask Him of
Saint Antoine here."

The Doctor turned his eyes upon that man.  Who moved uneasily on his
feet, rubbed his beard a little, and at length said:

"Well!  Truly it is against rule.  But he is denounced--and
gravely--by the Citizen and Citizeness Defarge.  And by one other."

"What other?"

"Do YOU ask, Citizen Doctor?"

"Yes."

"Then," said he of Saint Antoine, with a strange look, "you will be
answered to-morrow.  Now, I am dumb!"



VIII

A Hand at Cards


Happily unconscious of the new calamity at home, Miss Pross threaded
her way along the narrow streets and crossed the river by the bridge
of the Pont-Neuf, reckoning in her mind the number of indispensable
purchases she had to make.  Mr. Cruncher, with the basket, walked at
her side.  They both looked to the right and to the left into most of
the shops they passed, had a wary eye for all gregarious assemblages
of people, and turned out of their road to avoid any very excited
group of talkers.  It was a raw evening, and the misty river, blurred
to the eye with blazing lights and to the ear with harsh noises,
showed where the barges were stationed in which the smiths worked,
making guns for the Army of the Republic.  Woe to the man who played
tricks with THAT Army, or got undeserved promotion in it!  Better
for him that his beard had never grown, for the National Razor shaved
him close.

Having purchased a few small articles of grocery, and a measure of
oil for the lamp, Miss Pross bethought herself of the wine they
wanted. After peeping into several wine-shops, she stopped at the
sign of the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, not far from the
National Palace, once (and twice) the Tuileries, where the aspect of
things rather took her fancy.  It had a quieter look than any other
place of the same description they had passed, and, though red with
patriotic caps, was not so red as the rest.  Sounding Mr. Cruncher,
and finding him of her opinion, Miss Pross resorted to the Good
Republican Brutus of Antiquity, attended by her cavalier.

Slightly observant of the smoky lights; of the people, pipe in mouth,
playing with limp cards and yellow dominoes; of the one bare-
breasted, bare-armed, soot-begrimed workman reading a journal aloud,
and of the others listening to him; of the weapons worn, or laid
aside to be resumed; of the two or three customers fallen forward
asleep, who in the popular high-shouldered shaggy black spencer
looked, in that attitude, like slumbering bears or dogs; the two
outlandish customers approached the counter, and showed what they wanted.

As their wine was measuring out, a man parted from another man in a
corner, and rose to depart.  In going, he had to face Miss Pross.
No sooner did he face her, than Miss Pross uttered a scream, and
clapped her hands.

In a moment, the whole company were on their feet.  That somebody was
assassinated by somebody vindicating a difference of opinion was the
likeliest occurrence.  Everybody looked to see somebody fall, but
only saw a man and a woman standing staring at each other; the man
with all the outward aspect of a Frenchman and a thorough Republican;
the woman, evidently English.

What was said in this disappointing anti-climax, by the disciples of
the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, except that it was something
very voluble and loud, would have been as so much Hebrew or Chaldean
to Miss Pross and her protector, though they had been all ears.  But,
they bad no ears for anything in their surprise.  For, it must be
recorded, that not only was Miss Pross lost in amazement and
agitation, but, Mr. Cruncher--though it seemed on his own separate
and individual account--was in a state of the greatest wonder.

"What is the matter?" said the man who had caused Miss Pross to scream;
speaking in a vexed, abrupt voice (though in a low tone), and in
English.

"Oh, Solomon, dear Solomon!" cried Miss Pross, clapping her hands
again.  "After not setting eyes upon you or hearing of you for so
long a time, do I find you here!"

"Don't call me Solomon.  Do you want to be the death of me?"  asked
the man, in a furtive, frightened way.

"Brother, brother!" cried Miss Pross, bursting into tears.  "Have I
ever been so hard with you that you ask me such a cruel question?"

"Then hold your meddlesome tongue," said Solomon, "and come out, if
you want to speak to me.  Pay for your wine, and come out.
Who's this man?"

Miss Pross, shaking her loving and dejected head at her by no means
affectionate brother, said through her tears, "Mr. Cruncher."

"Let him come out too," said Solomon.  "Does he think me a ghost?"

Apparently, Mr. Cruncher did, to judge from his looks.  He said not a
word, however, and Miss Pross, exploring the depths of her reticule
through her tears with great difficulty paid for her wine.  As she
did so, Solomon turned to the followers of the Good Republican Brutus
of Antiquity, and offered a few words of explanation in the French
language, which caused them all to relapse into their former places
and pursuits.

"Now," said Solomon, stopping at the dark street corner, "what do you want?"

"How dreadfully unkind in a brother nothing has ever turned my love
away from!" cried Miss Pross, "to give me such a greeting, and show
me no affection."

"There.  Confound it!  There," said Solomon, making a dab at Miss
Pross's lips with his own.  "Now are you content?"

Miss Pross only shook her head and wept in silence.

"If you expect me to be surprised," said her brother Solomon, "I am
not surprised; I knew you were here; I know of most people who are
here.  If you really don't want to endanger my existence--which I half
believe you do--go your ways as soon as possible, and let me go mine.
I am busy.  I am an official."

"My English brother Solomon," mourned Miss Pross, casting up her
tear-fraught eyes, "that had the makings in him of one of the best
and greatest of men in his native country, an official among
foreigners, and such foreigners!  I would almost sooner have seen the
dear boy lying in his--"

"I said so!" cried her brother, interrupting.  "I knew it.  You want
to be the death of me.  I shall be rendered Suspected, by my own
sister.  Just as I am getting on!"

"The gracious and merciful Heavens forbid!" cried Miss Pross.  "Far
rather would I never see you again, dear Solomon, though I have ever
loved you truly, and ever shall.  Say but one affectionate word to
me, and tell me there is nothing angry or estranged between us, and I
will detain you no longer."

Good Miss Pross!  As if the estrangement between them had come of any
culpability of hers.  As if Mr. Lorry had not known it for a fact,
years ago, in the quiet corner in Soho, that this precious brother
had spent her money and left her!

He was saying the affectionate word, however, with a far more
grudging condescension and patronage than he could have shown if
their relative merits and positions had been reversed (which is
invariably the case, all the world over), when Mr. Cruncher, touching
him on the shoulder, hoarsely and unexpectedly interposed with the
following singular question:

"I say!  Might I ask the favour?  As to whether your name is John
Solomon, or Solomon John?"

The official turned towards him with sudden distrust.  He had not
previously uttered a word.

"Come!" said Mr. Cruncher.  "Speak out, you know."  (Which, by the
way, was more than he could do himself.) "John Solomon, or Solomon
John?  She calls you Solomon, and she must know, being your sister.
And _I_ know you're John, you know. Which of the two goes first?
And regarding that name of Pross, likewise.  That warn't your name
over the water."

"What do you mean?"

"Well, I don't know all I mean, for I can't call to mind what your
name was, over the water."

"No?"

"No.  But I'll swear it was a name of two syllables."

"Indeed?"

"Yes.  T'other one's was one syllable.  I know you.  You was a spy--
witness at the Bailey.  What, in the name of the Father of Lies,
own father to yourself, was you called at that time?"

"Barsad," said another voice, striking in.

"That's the name for a thousand pound!" cried Jerry.

The speaker who struck in, was Sydney Carton.  He had his hands
behind him under the skirts of his riding-coat, and he stood at
Mr. Cruncher's elbow as negligently as he might have stood at the Old
Bailey itself.

"Don't be alarmed, my dear Miss Pross.  I arrived at Mr. Lorry's,
to his surprise, yesterday evening; we agreed that I would not
present myself elsewhere until all was well, or unless I could be
useful; I present myself here, to beg a little talk with your brother.
I wish you had a better employed brother than Mr. Barsad.  I wish
for your sake Mr. Barsad was not a Sheep of the Prisons."

Sheep was a cant word of the time for a spy, under the gaolers.
The spy, who was pale, turned paler, and asked him how he dared--

"I'll tell you," said Sydney.  "I lighted on you, Mr. Barsad, coming
out of the prison of the Conciergerie while I was contemplating the
walls, an hour or more ago.  You have a face to be remembered, and I
remember faces well.  Made curious by seeing you in that connection,
and having a reason, to which you are no stranger, for associating
you with the misfortunes of a friend now very unfortunate, I walked
in your direction.  I walked into the wine-shop here, close after you,
and sat near you.  I had no difficulty in deducing from your unreserved
conversation, and the rumour openly going about among your admirers,
the nature of your calling.  And gradually, what I had done at random,
seemed to shape itself into a purpose, Mr. Barsad."

"What purpose?" the spy asked.

"It would be troublesome, and might be dangerous, to explain in the
street.  Could you favour me, in confidence, with some minutes of
your company--at the office of Tellson's Bank, for instance?"

"Under a threat?"

"Oh!  Did I say that?"

"Then, why should I go there?"

"Really, Mr. Barsad, I can't say, if you can't."

"Do you mean that you won't say, sir?" the spy irresolutely asked.

"You apprehend me very clearly, Mr. Barsad.  I won't."

Carton's negligent recklessness of manner came powerfully in aid of
his quickness and skill, in such a business as be had in his secret
mind, and with such a man as he had to do with.  His practised eye
saw it, and made the most of it.

"Now, I told you so," said the spy, casting a reproachful look at his
sister; "if any trouble comes of this, it's your doing."

"Come, come, Mr. Barsad!" exclaimed Sydney.  "Don't be
ungrateful. But for my great respect for your sister, I might not
have led up so pleasantly to a little proposal that I wish to make
for our mutual satisfaction.  Do you go with me to the Bank?"

"I'll hear what you have got to say.  Yes, I'll go with you."

"I propose that we first conduct your sister safely to the corner of
her own street.  Let me take your arm, Miss Pross.  This is not a
good city, at this time, for you to be out in, unprotected; and as
your escort knows Mr. Barsad, I will invite him to Mr. Lorry's with us.
Are we ready?  Come then!"

Miss Pross recalled soon afterwards, and to the end of her life
remembered, that as she pressed her hands on Sydney's arm and looked
up in his face, imploring him to do no hurt to Solomon, there was a
braced purpose in the arm and a kind of inspiration in the eyes,
which not only contradicted his light manner, but changed and raised
the man.  She was too much occupied then with fears for the brother
who so little deserved her affection, and with Sydney's friendly
reassurances, adequately to heed what she observed.

They left her at the corner of the street, and Carton led the way to
Mr. Lorry's, which was within a few minutes' walk.  John Barsad, or
Solomon Pross, walked at his side.

Mr. Lorry had just finished his dinner, and was sitting before a
cheery little log or two of fire--perhaps looking into their blaze
for the picture of that younger elderly gentleman from Tellson's, who
had looked into the red coals at the Royal George at Dover, now a
good many years ago.  He turned his head as they entered, and showed
the surprise with which he saw a stranger.

"Miss Pross's brother, sir," said Sydney.  "Mr. Barsad."

"Barsad?" repeated the old gentleman, "Barsad?  I have an association
with the name--and with the face."

"I told you you had a remarkable face, Mr. Barsad," observed Carton,
coolly.  "Pray sit down."

As he took a chair himself, he supplied the link that Mr. Lorry
wanted, by saying to him with a frown, "Witness at that trial."
Mr. Lorry immediately remembered, and regarded his new visitor with
an undisguised look of abhorrence.

"Mr. Barsad has been recognised by Miss Pross as the affectionate
brother you have heard of," said Sydney, "and has acknowledged the
relationship.  I pass to worse news.  Darnay has been arrested again."

Struck with consternation, the old gentleman exclaimed, "What do you
tell me!  I left him safe and free within these two hours, and am
about to return to him!"

"Arrested for all that.  When was it done, Mr. Barsad?"

"Just now, if at all."

"Mr. Barsad is the best authority possible, sir," said Sydney, "and I
have it from Mr. Barsad's communication to a friend and brother Sheep
over a bottle of wine, that the arrest has taken place.  He left the
messengers at the gate, and saw them admitted by the porter.
There is no earthly doubt that he is retaken."

Mr. Lorry's business eye read in the speaker's face that it was loss
of time to dwell upon the point.  Confused, but sensible that
something might depend on his presence of mind, he commanded himself,
and was silently attentive.

"Now, I trust," said Sydney to him, "that the name and influence of
Doctor Manette may stand him in as good stead to-morrow--you said he
would be before the Tribunal again to-morrow, Mr. Barsad?--"

"Yes; I believe so."

"--In as good stead to-morrow as to-day.  But it may not be so.
I own to you, I am shaken, Mr. Lorry, by Doctor Manette's not having
had the power to prevent this arrest."

"He may not have known of it beforehand," said Mr. Lorry.

"But that very circumstance would be alarming, when we remember how
identified he is with his son-in-law."

"That's true," Mr. Lorry acknowledged, with his troubled hand at his
chin, and his troubled eyes on Carton.

"In short," said Sydney, "this is a desperate time, when desperate
games are played for desperate stakes.  Let the Doctor play the
winning game; I will play the losing one.  No man's life here is
worth purchase. Any one carried home by the people to-day, may be
condemned tomorrow.  Now, the stake I have resolved to play for, in
case of the worst, is a friend in the Conciergerie.  And the friend I
purpose to myself to win, is Mr. Barsad."

"You need have good cards, sir," said the spy.

"I'll run them over.  I'll see what I hold,--Mr. Lorry, you know
what a brute I am; I wish you'd give me a little brandy."

It was put before him, and he drank off a glassful--drank off another
glassful--pushed the bottle thoughtfully away.

"Mr. Barsad," he went on, in the tone of one who really was looking
over a hand at cards:  "Sheep of the prisons, emissary of Republican
committees, now turnkey, now prisoner, always spy and secret
informer, so much the more valuable here for being English that an
Englishman is less open to suspicion of subornation in those
characters than a Frenchman, represents himself to his employers
under a false name. That's a very good card.  Mr. Barsad, now in the
employ of the republican French government, was formerly in the
employ of the aristocratic English government, the enemy of France
and freedom.  That's an excellent card.  Inference clear as day in
this region of suspicion, that Mr. Barsad, still in the pay of the
aristocratic English government, is the spy of Pitt, the treacherous
foe of the Republic crouching in its bosom, the English traitor and
agent of all mischief so much spoken of and so difficult to find.
That's a card not to be beaten.  Have you followed my hand, Mr. Barsad?"

"Not to understand your play," returned the spy, somewhat uneasily.

"I play my Ace, Denunciation of Mr. Barsad to the nearest Section
Committee.  Look over your hand, Mr. Barsad, and see what you have.
Don't hurry."

He drew the bottle near, poured out another glassful of brandy,
and drank it off.  He saw that the spy was fearful of his drinking
himself into a fit state for the immediate denunciation of him.
Seeing it, he poured out and drank another glassful.

"Look over your hand carefully, Mr. Barsad.  Take time."

It was a poorer hand than he suspected.  Mr. Barsad saw losing cards
in it that Sydney Carton knew nothing of.  Thrown out of his
honourable employment in England, through too much unsuccessful hard
swearing there--not because he was not wanted there; our English
reasons for vaunting our superiority to secrecy and spies are of very
modern date--he knew that he had crossed the Channel, and accepted
service in France:  first, as a tempter and an eavesdropper among his
own countrymen there:  gradually, as a tempter and an eavesdropper
among the natives.  He knew that under the overthrown government he
had been a spy upon Saint Antoine and Defarge's wine-shop; had
received from the watchful police such heads of information
concerning Doctor Manette's imprisonment, release, and history, as
should serve him for an introduction to familiar conversation with
the Defarges; and tried them on Madame Defarge, and had broken down
with them signally.  He always remembered with fear and trembling,
that that terrible woman had knitted when he talked with her, and had
looked ominously at him as her fingers moved.  He had since seen her,
in the Section of Saint Antoine, over and over again produce her
knitted registers, and denounce people whose lives the guillotine
then surely swallowed up.  He knew, as every one employed as he was
did, that he was never safe; that flight was impossible; that he was
tied fast under the shadow of the axe; and that in spite of his
utmost tergiversation and treachery in furtherance of the reigning
terror, a word might bring it down upon him.  Once denounced, and on
such grave grounds as had just now been suggested to his mind, he
foresaw that the dreadful woman of whose unrelenting character he had
seen many proofs, would produce against him that fatal register, and
would quash his last chance of life.  Besides that all secret men are
men soon terrified, here were surely cards enough of one black suit,
to justify the holder in growing rather livid as he turned them over.

"You scarcely seem to like your hand," said Sydney, with the greatest
composure.  "Do you play?"

"I think, sir," said the spy, in the meanest manner, as he turned to
Mr. Lorry, "I may appeal to a gentleman of your years and benevolence,
to put it to this other gentleman, so much your junior, whether he
can under any circumstances reconcile it to his station to play that
Ace of which he has spoken.  I admit that _I_ am a spy, and that it
is considered a discreditable station--though it must be filled by
somebody; but this gentleman is no spy, and why should he so demean
himself as to make himself one?"

"I play my Ace, Mr. Barsad," said Carton, taking the answer on himself,
and looking at his watch, "without any scruple, in a very few minutes."

"I should have hoped, gentlemen both," said the spy, always striving
to hook Mr. Lorry into the discussion, "that your respect for my
sister--"

"I could not better testify my respect for your sister than by
finally relieving her of her brother," said Sydney Carton.

"You think not, sir?"

"I have thoroughly made up my mind about it."

The smooth manner of the spy, curiously in dissonance with his
ostentatiously rough dress, and probably with his usual demeanour,
received such a check from the inscrutability of Carton,--who was a
mystery to wiser and honester men than he,--that it faltered here and
failed him.  While he was at a loss, Carton said, resuming his former
air of contemplating cards:

"And indeed, now I think again, I have a strong impression that I
have another good card here, not yet enumerated.  That friend and
fellow-Sheep, who spoke of himself as pasturing in the country prisons;
who was he?"

"French.  You don't know him," said the spy, quickly.

"French, eh?" repeated Carton, musing, and not appearing to notice
him at all, though he echoed his word.  "Well; he may be."

"Is, I assure you," said the spy; "though it's not important."

"Though it's not important," repeated Carton, in the same mechanical
way--"though it's not important--No, it's not important.  No. Yet I
know the face."

"I think not.  I am sure not.  It can't be," said the spy.

"It-can't-be," muttered Sydney Carton, retrospectively, and idling
his glass (which fortunately was a small one) again.  "Can't-be.
Spoke good French.  Yet like a foreigner, I thought?"

"Provincial," said the spy.

"No.  Foreign!" cried Carton, striking his open hand on the table, as
a light broke clearly on his mind.  "Cly!  Disguised, but the same man.
We had that man before us at the Old Bailey."

"Now, there you are hasty, sir," said Barsad, with a smile that gave
his aquiline nose an extra inclination to one side; "there you really
give me an advantage over you.  Cly (who I will unreservedly admit,
at this distance of time, was a partner of mine) has been dead
several years.  I attended him in his last illness.  He was buried in
London, at the church of Saint Pancras-in-the-Fields.  His unpopularity
with the blackguard multitude at the moment prevented my following
his remains, but I helped to lay him in his coffin."

Here, Mr. Lorry became aware, from where he sat, of a most remarkable
goblin shadow on the wall.  Tracing it to its source, he discovered
it to be caused by a sudden extraordinary rising and stiffening of
all the risen and stiff hair on Mr. Cruncher's head.

"Let us be reasonable," said the spy, "and let us be fair.  To show
you how mistaken you are, and what an unfounded assumption yours is,
I will lay before you a certificate of Cly's burial, which I happened
to have carried in my pocket-book," with a hurried hand he produced
and opened it, "ever since.  There it is.  Oh, look at it, look at it!
You may take it in your hand; it's no forgery."

Here, Mr. Lorry perceived the reflection on the wall to elongate, and
Mr. Cruncher rose and stepped forward.  His hair could not have been
more violently on end, if it had been that moment dressed by the Cow
with the crumpled horn in the house that Jack built.

Unseen by the spy, Mr. Cruncher stood at his side, and touched him on
the shoulder like a ghostly bailiff.

"That there Roger Cly, master," said Mr. Cruncher, with a taciturn
and iron-bound visage.  "So YOU put him in his coffin?"

"I did."

"Who took him out of it?"

Barsad leaned back in his chair, and stammered, "What do you mean?"

"I mean," said Mr. Cruncher, "that he warn't never in it.  No!  Not he!
I'll have my head took off, if he was ever in it."

The spy looked round at the two gentlemen; they both looked in
unspeakable astonishment at Jerry.

"I tell you," said Jerry, "that you buried paving-stones and earth in
that there coffin.  Don't go and tell me that you buried Cly.  It was
a take in. Me and two more knows it."

"How do you know it?"

"What's that to you?  Ecod!" growled Mr. Cruncher, "it's you I have got
a old grudge again, is it, with your shameful impositions upon tradesmen!
I'd catch hold of your throat and choke you for half a guinea."

Sydney Carton, who, with Mr. Lorry, had been lost in amazement at
this turn of the business, here requested Mr. Cruncher to moderate
and explain himself.

"At another time, sir," he returned, evasively, "the present time is
ill-conwenient for explainin'.  What I stand to, is, that he knows
well wot that there Cly was never in that there coffin.  Let him say
he was, in so much as a word of one syllable, and I'll either catch
hold of his throat and choke him for half a guinea;" Mr. Cruncher
dwelt upon this as quite a liberal offer; "or I'll out and announce him."

"Humph!  I see one thing," said Carton.  "I hold another card,
Mr. Barsad.  Impossible, here in raging Paris, with Suspicion filling
the air, for you to outlive denunciation, when you are in communication
with another aristocratic spy of the same antecedents as yourself,
who, moreover, has the mystery about him of having feigned death and
come to life again!  A plot in the prisons, of the foreigner against
the Republic. A strong card--a certain Guillotine card!  Do you play?"

"No!" returned the spy.  "I throw up.  I confess that we were so
unpopular with the outrageous mob, that I only got away from England
at the risk of being ducked to death, and that Cly was so ferreted up
and down, that he never would have got away at all but for that sham.
Though how this man knows it was a sham, is a wonder of wonders to me."

"Never you trouble your head about this man," retorted the
contentious Mr. Cruncher; "you'll have trouble enough with giving
your attention to that gentleman.  And look here!  Once more!"--
Mr. Cruncher could not be restrained from making rather an ostentatious
parade of his liberality--"I'd catch hold of your throat and choke
you for half a guinea."

The Sheep of the prisons turned from him to Sydney Carton, and said,
with more decision, "It has come to a point.  I go on duty soon, and
can't overstay my time.  You told me you had a proposal; what is it?
Now, it is of no use asking too much of me.  Ask me to do anything in
my office, putting my head in great extra danger, and I had better
trust my life to the chances of a refusal than the chances of consent.
In short, I should make that choice.  You talk of desperation.
We are all desperate here.  Remember!  I may denounce you if I think
proper, and I can swear my way through stone walls, and so can others.
Now, what do you want with me?"

"Not very much.  You are a turnkey at the Conciergerie?"

"I tell you once for all, there is no such thing as an escape possible,"
said the spy, firmly.

"Why need you tell me what I have not asked?  You are a turnkey at the
Conciergerie?"

"I am sometimes."

"You can be when you choose?"

"I can pass in and out when I choose."

Sydney Carton filled another glass with brandy, poured it slowly out
upon the hearth, and watched it as it dropped.  It being all spent,
he said, rising:

"So far, we have spoken before these two, because it was as well that
the merits of the cards should not rest solely between you and me.
Come into the dark room here, and let us have one final word alone."



IX

The Game Made


While Sydney Carton and the Sheep of the prisons were in the
adjoining dark room, speaking so low that not a sound was heard,
Mr. Lorry looked at Jerry in considerable doubt and mistrust.  That
honest tradesman's manner of receiving the look, did not inspire
confidence; he changed the leg on which he rested, as often as if he
had fifty of those limbs, and were trying them all; he examined his
finger-nails with a very questionable closeness of attention; and
whenever Mr. Lorry's eye caught his, he was taken with that peculiar
kind of short cough requiring the hollow of a hand before it, which
is seldom, if ever, known to be an infirmity attendant on perfect
openness of character.

"Jerry," said Mr. Lorry.  "Come here."

Mr. Cruncher came forward sideways, with one of his shoulders in
advance of him.

"What have you been, besides a messenger?"

After some cogitation, accompanied with an intent look at his patron,
Mr. Cruncher conceived the luminous idea of replying, "Agicultooral
character."

"My mind misgives me much," said Mr. Lorry, angrily shaking a
forefinger at him, "that you have used the respectable and great
house of Tellson's as a blind, and that you have had an unlawful
occupation of an infamous description.  If you have, don't expect me
to befriend you when you get back to England.  If you have, don't
expect me to keep your secret.  Tellson's shall not be imposed upon."

"I hope, sir," pleaded the abashed Mr. Cruncher, "that a gentleman
like yourself wot I've had the honour of odd jobbing till I'm grey at
it, would think twice about harming of me, even if it wos so--I don't
say it is, but even if it wos.  And which it is to be took into
account that if it wos, it wouldn't, even then, be all o' one side.
There'd be two sides to it. There might be medical doctors at the
present hour, a picking up their guineas where a honest tradesman
don't pick up his fardens--fardens! no, nor yet his half fardens--
half fardens! no, nor yet his quarter--a banking away like smoke at
Tellson's, and a cocking their medical eyes at that tradesman on the
sly, a going in and going out to their own carriages--ah! equally
like smoke, if not more so.  Well, that 'ud be imposing, too, on
Tellson's.  For you cannot sarse the goose and not the gander.
And here's Mrs. Cruncher, or leastways wos in the Old England times,
and would be to-morrow, if cause given, a floppin' again the business
to that degree as is ruinating--stark ruinating!  Whereas them medical
doctors' wives don't flop--catch 'em at it!  Or, if they flop, their
toppings goes in favour of more patients, and how can you rightly
have one without t'other?  Then, wot with undertakers, and wot with
parish clerks, and wot with sextons, and wot with private watchmen
(all awaricious and all in it), a man wouldn't get much by it, even
if it wos so.  And wot little a man did get, would never prosper with
him, Mr. Lorry.  He'd never have no good of it; he'd want all along
to be out of the line, if he, could see his way out, being once in--
even if it wos so."

"Ugh!" cried Mr. Lorry, rather relenting, nevertheless, "I am shocked
at the sight of you."

"Now, what I would humbly offer to you, sir," pursued Mr. Cruncher,
"even if it wos so, which I don't say it is--"

"Don't prevaricate," said Mr. Lorry.

"No, I will NOT, sir," returned Mr. Crunches as if nothing were
further from his thoughts or practice--"which I don't say it is--wot
I would humbly offer to you, sir, would be this.  Upon that there
stool, at that there Bar, sets that there boy of mine, brought up and
growed up to be a man, wot will errand you, message you, general-
light-job you, till your heels is where your head is, if such should
be your wishes.  If it wos so, which I still don't say it is (for I
will not prewaricate to you, sir), let that there boy keep his
father's place, and take care of his mother; don't blow upon that
boy's father--do not do it, sir--and let that father go into the line
of the reg'lar diggin', and make amends for what he would have
undug--if it wos so-by diggin' of 'em in with a will, and with
conwictions respectin' the futur' keepin' of 'em safe.  That,
Mr. Lorry," said Mr. Cruncher, wiping his forehead with his arm, as
an announcement that he had arrived at the peroration of his
discourse, "is wot I would respectfully offer to you, sir.  A man
don't see all this here a goin' on dreadful round him, in the way of
Subjects without heads, dear me, plentiful enough fur to bring the
price down to porterage and hardly that, without havin' his serious
thoughts of things.  And these here would be mine, if it wos so,
entreatin' of you fur to bear in mind that wot I said just now, I up
and said in the good cause when I might have kep' it back."

"That at least is true, said Mr. Lorry.  "Say no more now.  It may be
that I shall yet stand your friend, if you deserve it, and repent in
action--not in words.  I want no more words."

Mr. Cruncher knuckled his forehead, as Sydney Carton and the spy
returned from the dark room.  "Adieu, Mr. Barsad," said the former;
"our arrangement thus made, you have nothing to fear from me."

He sat down in a chair on the hearth, over against Mr. Lorry.
When they were alone, Mr. Lorry asked him what he had done?

"Not much.  If it should go ill with the prisoner, I have ensured
access to him, once."

Mr. Lorry's countenance fell.

"It is all I could do," said Carton.  "To propose too much, would be
to put this man's head under the axe, and, as he himself said,
nothing worse could happen to him if he were denounced.  It was
obviously the weakness of the position.  There is no help for it."

"But access to him," said Mr. Lorry, "if it should go ill before the
Tribunal, will not save him."

"I never said it would."

Mr. Lorry's eyes gradually sought the fire; his sympathy with his
darling, and the heavy disappointment of his second arrest, gradually
weakened them; he was an old man now, overborne with anxiety of late,
and his tears fell.

"You are a good man and a true friend," said Carton, in an altered
voice.  "Forgive me if I notice that you are affected.  I could not
see my father weep, and sit by, careless.  And I could not respect
your sorrow more, if you were my father.  You are free from that
misfortune, however."

Though he said the last words, with a slip into his usual manner,
there was a true feeling and respect both in his tone and in his
touch, that Mr. Lorry, who had never seen the better side of him,
was wholly unprepared for.  He gave him his band, and Carton gently
pressed it.

"To return to poor Darnay," said Carton.  "Don't tell Her of this
interview, or this arrangement.  It would not enable Her to go to see
him. She might think it was contrived, in case of the worse, to
convey to him the means of anticipating the sentence."

Mr. Lorry had not thought of that, and he looked quickly at Carton to
see if it were in his mind.  It seemed to be; he returned the look,
and evidently understood it.

"She might think a thousand things," Carton said, "and any of them
would only add to her trouble.  Don't speak of me to her.  As I said
to you when I first came, I had better not see her.  I can put my
hand out, to do any little helpful work for her that my hand can find
to do, without that. You are going to her, I hope?  She must be very
desolate to-night."

"I am going now, directly."

"I am glad of that.  She has such a strong attachment to you and
reliance on you.  How does she look?"

"Anxious and unhappy, but very beautiful."

"Ah!"

It was a long, grieving sound, like a sigh--almost like a sob.  It
attracted Mr. Lorry's eyes to Carton's face, which was turned to the
fire.  A light, or a shade (the old gentleman could not have said
which), passed from it as swiftly as a change will sweep over a
hill-side on a wild bright day, and he lifted his foot to put back
one of the little flaming logs, which was tumbling forward.  He wore
the white riding-coat and top-boots, then in vogue, and the light of
the fire touching their light surfaces made him look very pale, with
his long brown hair, all untrimmed, hanging loose about him.  His
indifference to fire was sufficiently remarkable to elicit a word of
remonstrance from Mr. Lorry; his boot was still upon the hot embers
of the flaming log, when it had broken under the weight of Ms foot.

"I forgot it," he said.

Mr. Lorry's eyes were again attracted to his face.  Taking note of
the wasted air which clouded the naturally handsome features, and
having the expression of prisoners' faces fresh in his mind, he was
strongly reminded of that expression.

"And your duties here have drawn to an end, sir?" said Carton,
turning to him.

"Yes.  As I was telling you last night when Lucie came in so
unexpectedly, I have at length done all that I can do here.  I hoped
to have left them in perfect safety, and then to have quitted Paris.
I have my Leave to Pass.  I was ready to go."

They were both silent.

"Yours is a long life to look back upon, sir?" said Carton, wistfully.

"I am in my seventy-eighth year."

"You have been useful all your life; steadily and constantly occupied;
trusted, respected, and looked up to?"

"I have been a man of business, ever since I have been a man.
indeed, I may say that I was a man of business when a boy."

"See what a place you fill at seventy-eight.  How many people will
miss you when you leave it empty!"

"A solitary old bachelor," answered Mr. Lorry, shaking his
head. "There is nobody to weep for me."

"How can you say that?  Wouldn't She weep for you?  Wouldn't her child?"

"Yes, yes, thank God.  I didn't quite mean what I said."

"It IS a thing to thank God for; is it not?"

"Surely, surely."

"If you could say, with truth, to your own solitary heart, to-night,
'I have secured to myself the love and attachment, the gratitude or
respect, of no human creature; I have won myself a tender place in no
regard; I have done nothing good or serviceable to be remembered by!'
your seventy-eight years would be seventy-eight heavy curses; would
they not?"

"You say truly, Mr. Carton; I think they would be."

Sydney turned his eyes again upon the fire, and, after a silence of a
few moments, said:

"I should like to ask you:--Does your childhood seem far off?  Do the
days when you sat at your mother's knee, seem days of very long ago?"

Responding to his softened manner, Mr. Lorry answered:

"Twenty years back, yes; at this time of my life, no.  For, as I draw
closer and closer to the end, I travel in the circle, nearer and
nearer to the beginning.  It seems to be one of the kind smoothings
and preparings of the way.  My heart is touched now, by many
remembrances that had long fallen asleep, of my pretty young mother
(and I so old!), and by many associations of the days when what we
call the World was not so real with me, and my faults were not
confirmed in me."

"I understand the feeling!" exclaimed Carton, with a bright flush.
"And you are the better for it?"

"I hope so."

Carton terminated the conversation here, by rising to help him on
with his outer coat; "But you," said Mr. Lorry, reverting to the theme,
"you are young."

"Yes," said Carton.  "I am not old, but my young way was never the
way to age.  Enough of me."

"And of me, I am sure," said Mr. Lorry.  "Are you going out?"

"I'll walk with you to her gate.  You know my vagabond and restless
habits.  If I should prowl about the streets a long time, don't be
uneasy; I shall reappear in the morning.  You go to the Court to-morrow?"

"Yes, unhappily."

"I shall be there, but only as one of the crowd.  My Spy will find a
place for me.  Take my arm, sir."

Mr. Lorry did so, and they went down-stairs and out in the streets.
A few minutes brought them to Mr. Lorry's destination.  Carton left
him there; but lingered at a little distance, and turned back to the
gate again when it was shut, and touched it.  He had heard of her
going to the prison every day.  "She came out here," he said, looking
about him, "turned this way, must have trod on these stones often.
Let me follow in her steps."

It was ten o'clock at night when he stood before the prison of La
Force, where she had stood hundreds of times.  A little wood-sawyer,
having closed his shop, was smoking his pipe at his shop-door.

"Good night, citizen," said Sydney Carton, pausing in going by;
for, the man eyed him inquisitively.

"Good night, citizen."

"How goes the Republic?"

"You mean the Guillotine.  Not ill.  Sixty-three to-day.  We shall
mount to a hundred soon.  Samson and his men complain sometimes, of
being exhausted.  Ha, ha, ha!  He is so droll, that Samson.
Such a Barber!"

"Do you often go to see him--"

"Shave?  Always.  Every day.  What a barber!  You have seen him at work?"

"Never."

"Go and see him when he has a good batch.  Figure this to yourself,
citizen; he shaved the sixty-three to-day, in less than two pipes!
Less than two pipes.  Word of honour!"

As the grinning little man held out the pipe he was smoking, to
explain how he timed the executioner, Carton was so sensible of a
rising desire to strike the life out of him, that he turned away.

"But you are not English," said the wood-sawyer, "though you wear
English dress?"

"Yes," said Carton, pausing again, and answering over his shoulder.

"You speak like a Frenchman."

"I am an old student here."

"Aha, a perfect Frenchman!  Good night, Englishman."

"Good night, citizen."

"But go and see that droll dog," the little man persisted, calling
after him.  "And take a pipe with you!"

Sydney had not gone far out of sight, when he stopped in the middle
of the street under a glimmering lamp, and wrote with his pencil on a
scrap of paper.  Then, traversing with the decided step of one who
remembered the way well, several dark and dirty streets--much dirtier
than usual, for the best public thoroughfares remained uncleansed in
those times of terror--he stopped at a chemist's shop, which the
owner was closing with his own hands.  A small, dim, crooked shop,
kept in a tortuous, up-hill thoroughfare, by a small, dim, crooked man.

Giving this citizen, too, good night, as he confronted him at his
counter, he laid the scrap of paper before him.  "Whew!" the chemist
whistled softly, as he read it.  "Hi! hi! hi!"

Sydney Carton took no heed, and the chemist said:

"For you, citizen?"

"For me."

"You will be careful to keep them separate, citizen?  You know the
consequences of mixing them?"

"Perfectly."

Certain small packets were made and given to him.  He put them, one
by one, in the breast of his inner coat, counted out the money for
them, and deliberately left the shop.  "There is nothing more to do,"
said he, glancing upward at the moon, "until to-morrow.  I can't sleep."

It was not a reckless manner, the manner in which he said these words
aloud under the fast-sailing clouds, nor was it more expressive of
negligence than defiance.  It was the settled manner of a tired man,
who had wandered and struggled and got lost, but who at length struck
into his road and saw its end.

Long ago, when he had been famous among his earliest competitors as a
youth of great promise, be had followed his father to the grave.
His mother had died, years before.  These solemn words, which had
been read at his father's grave, arose in his mind as he went down
the dark streets, among the heavy shadows, with the moon and the
clouds sailing on high above him.  "I am the resurrection and the
life, saith the Lord:  he that believeth in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live:  and whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall
never die."

In a city dominated by the axe, alone at night, with natural sorrow
rising in him for the sixty-three who had been that day put to death,
and for to-morrow's victims then awaiting their doom in the prisons,
and still of to-morrow's and to-morrow's, the chain of association
that brought the words home, like a rusty old ship's anchor from the
deep, might have been easily found.  He did not seek it, but repeated
them and went on.

With a solemn interest in the lighted windows where the people were
going to rest, forgetful through a few calm hours of the horrors
surrounding them; in the towers of the churches, where no prayers
were said, for the popular revulsion had even travelled that length
of self-destruction from years of priestly impostors, plunderers, and
profligates; in the distant burial-places, reserved, as they wrote
upon the gates, for Eternal Sleep; in the abounding gaols; and in the
streets along which the sixties rolled to a death which had become so
common and material, that no sorrowful story of a haunting Spirit
ever arose among the people out of all the working of the Guillotine;
with a solemn interest in the whole life and death of the city
settling down to its short nightly pause in fury; Sydney Carton
crossed the Seine again for the lighter streets.

Few coaches were abroad, for riders in coaches were liable to be
suspected, and gentility hid its head in red nightcaps, and put on
heavy shoes, and trudged.  But, the theatres were all well filled,
and the people poured cheerfully out as he passed, and went chatting
home.  At one of the theatre doors, there was a little girl with a
mother, looking for a way across the street through the mud.
He carried the child over, and before, the timid arm was loosed from
his neck asked her for a kiss.

"I am the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord:  he that
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:  and
whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall never die."

Now, that the streets were quiet, and the night wore on, the words
were in the echoes of his feet, and were in the air.  Perfectly calm
and steady, he sometimes repeated them to himself as he walked; but,
he heard them always.

The night wore out, and, as he stood upon the bridge listening to the
water as it splashed the river-walls of the Island of Paris, where
the picturesque confusion of houses and cathedral shone bright in the
light of the moon, the day came coldly, looking like a dead face out
of the sky. Then, the night, with the moon and the stars, turned pale
and died, and for a little while it seemed as if Creation were
delivered over to Death's dominion.

But, the glorious sun, rising, seemed to strike those words, that
burden of the night, straight and warm to his heart in its long
bright rays.  And looking along them, with reverently shaded eyes,
a bridge of light appeared to span the air between him and the sun,
while the river sparkled under it.

The strong tide, so swift, so deep, and certain, was like a congenial
friend, in the morning stillness.  He walked by the stream, far from
the houses, and in the light and warmth of the sun fell asleep on the
bank. When he awoke and was afoot again, he lingered there yet a
little longer, watching an eddy that turned and turned purposeless,
until the stream absorbed it, and carried it on to the sea.--"Like me."

A trading-boat, with a sail of the softened colour of a dead leaf,
then glided into his view, floated by him, and died away.  As its
silent track in the water disappeared, the prayer that had broken up
out of his heart for a merciful consideration of all his poor
blindnesses and errors, ended in the words, "I am the resurrection
and the life."

Mr. Lorry was already out when he got back, and it was easy to
surmise where the good old man was gone.  Sydney Carton drank nothing
but a tittle coffee, ate some bread, and, having washed and changed
to refresh himself, went out to the place of trial.

The court was all astir and a-buzz, when the black sheep--whom many
fell away from in dread--pressed him into an obscure corner among the
crowd.  Mr. Lorry was there, and Doctor Manette was there.  She was
there, sitting beside her father.

When her husband was brought in, she turned a look upon him, so
sustaining, so encouraging, so full of admiring love and pitying
tenderness, yet so courageous for his sake, that it called the
healthy blood into his face, brightened his glance, and animated his
heart.  If there had been any eyes to notice the influence of her
look, on Sydney Carton, it would have been seen to be the same
influence exactly.

Before that unjust Tribunal, there was little or no order of
procedure, ensuring to any accused person any reasonable hearing.
There could have been no such Revolution, if all laws, forms, and
ceremonies, had not first been so monstrously abused, that the
suicidal vengeance of the Revolution was to scatter them all to the
winds.

Every eye was turned to the jury.  The same determined patriots and
good republicans as yesterday and the day before, and to-morrow and
the day after.  Eager and prominent among them, one man with a
craving face, and his fingers perpetually hovering about his lips,
whose appearance gave great satisfaction to the spectators.  A life-
thirsting, cannibal-looking, bloody-minded juryman, the Jacques Three
of St. Antoine.  The whole jury, as a jury of dogs empannelled to try
the deer.

Every eye then turned to the five judges and the public prosecutor.
No favourable leaning in that quarter to-day.  A fell, uncompromising,
murderous business-meaning there.  Every eye then sought some other
eye in the crowd, and gleamed at it approvingly; and heads nodded at
one another, before bending forward with a strained attention.

Charles Evremonde, called Darnay.  Released yesterday.  Reaccused and
retaken yesterday.  Indictment delivered to him last night. Suspected
and Denounced enemy of the Republic, Aristocrat, one of a family of
tyrants, one of a race proscribed, for that they had used their
abolished privileges to the infamous oppression of the people.
Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, in right of such proscription,
absolutely Dead in Law.

To this effect, in as few or fewer words, the Public Prosecutor.

The President asked, was the Accused openly denounced or secretly?

"Openly, President."

"By whom?"

"Three voices.  Ernest Defarge, wine-vendor of St. Antoine."

"Good."

"Therese Defarge, his wife."

"Good."

"Alexandre Manette, physician."

A great uproar took place in the court, and in the midst of it,
Doctor Manette was seen, pale and trembling, standing where he had
been seated.

"President, I indignantly protest to you that this is a forgery and a
fraud.  You know the accused to be the husband of my daughter.  My
daughter, and those dear to her, are far dearer to me than my life.
Who and where is the false conspirator who says that I denounce the
husband of my child!"

"Citizen Manette, be tranquil.  To fail in submission to the
authority of the Tribunal would be to put yourself out of Law.
As to what is dearer to you than life, nothing can be so dear to a
good citizen as the Republic."

Loud acclamations hailed this rebuke.  The President rang his bell,
and with warmth resumed.

"If the Republic should demand of you the sacrifice of your child
herself, you would have no duty but to sacrifice her.  Listen to what
is to follow.  In the meanwhile, be silent!"

Frantic acclamations were again raised.  Doctor Manette sat down,
with his eyes looking around, and his lips trembling; his daughter
drew closer to him.  The craving man on the jury rubbed his hands
together, and restored the usual hand to his mouth.

Defarge was produced, when the court was quiet enough to admit of his
being heard, and rapidly expounded the story of the imprisonment, and
of his having been a mere boy in the Doctor's service, and of the
release, and of the state of the prisoner when released and delivered
to him.  This short examination followed, for the court was quick
with its work.

"You did good service at the taking of the Bastille, citizen?"

"I believe so."

Here, an excited woman screeched from the crowd:  "You were one of the
best patriots there.  Why not say so?  You were a cannoneer that day
there, and you were among the first to enter the accursed fortress
when it fell.  Patriots, I speak the truth!"

It was The Vengeance who, amidst the warm commendations of the
audience, thus assisted the proceedings.  The President rang his
bell; but, The Vengeance, warming with encouragement, shrieked,
"I defy that bell!" wherein she was likewise much commended.

"Inform the Tribunal of what you did that day within the Bastille,
citizen."

"I knew," said Defarge, looking down at his wife, who stood at the
bottom of the steps on which he was raised, looking steadily up at
him; "I knew that this prisoner, of whom I speak, had been confined
in a cell known as One Hundred and Five, North Tower.  I knew it from
himself. He knew himself by no other name than One Hundred and Five,
North Tower, when he made shoes under my care.  As I serve my gun
that day, I resolve, when the place shall fall, to examine that cell.
It falls.  I mount to the cell, with a fellow-citizen who is one of
the Jury, directed by a gaoler.  I examine it, very closely.  In a
hole in the chimney, where a stone has been worked out and replaced,
I find a written paper.  This is that written paper.  I have made it
my business to examine some specimens of the writing of Doctor
Manette.  This is the writing of Doctor Manette.  I confide this
paper, in the writing of Doctor Manette, to the hands of the President."

"Let it be read."

In a dead silence and stillness--the prisoner under trial looking
lovingly at his wife, his wife only looking from him to look with
solicitude at her father, Doctor Manette keeping his eyes fixed on
the reader, Madame Defarge never taking hers from the prisoner,
Defarge never taking his from his feasting wife, and all the other
eyes there intent upon the Doctor, who saw none of them--the paper
was read, as follows.



X

THE Substance of the Shadow


"I, Alexandre Manette, unfortunate physician, native of Beauvais,
and afterwards resident in Paris, write this melancholy paper in my
doleful cell in the Bastille, during the last month of the year,
1767. I write it at stolen intervals, under every difficulty.
I design to secrete it in the wall of the chimney, where I have
slowly and laboriously made a place of concealment for it.  Some
pitying hand may find it there, when I and my sorrows are dust.

"These words are formed by the rusty iron point with which I write
with difficulty in scrapings of soot and charcoal from the chimney,
mixed with blood, in the last month of the tenth year of my captivity.
Hope has quite departed from my breast.  I know from terrible
warnings I have noted in myself that my reason will not long remain
unimpaired, but I solemnly declare that I am at this time in the
possession of my right mind--that my memory is exact and
circumstantial--and that I write the truth as I shall answer for
these my last recorded words, whether they be ever read by men or not,
at the Eternal Judgment-seat.

"One cloudy moonlight night, in the third week of December (I think
the twenty-second of the month) in the year 1757, I was walking on a
retired part of the quay by the Seine for the refreshment of the
frosty air, at an hour's distance from my place of residence in the
Street of the School of Medicine, when a carriage came along behind
me, driven very fast.  As I stood aside to let that carriage pass,
apprehensive that it might otherwise run me down, a head was put out
at the window, and a voice called to the driver to stop.

"The carriage stopped as soon as the driver could rein in his horses,
and the same voice called to me by my name.  I answered.  The carriage
was then so far in advance of me that two gentlemen had time to open
the door and alight before I came up with it.

I observed that they were both wrapped in cloaks, and appeared to
conceal themselves.  As they stood side by side near the carriage
door, I also observed that they both looked of about my own age, or
rather younger, and that they were greatly alike, in stature, manner,
voice, and (as far as I could see) face too.

"`You are Doctor Manette?' said one.

"I am."

"`Doctor Manette, formerly of Beauvais,' said the other; `the young
physician, originally an expert surgeon, who within the last year or
two has made a rising reputation in Paris?'

"`Gentlemen,' I returned, `I am that Doctor Manette of whom you speak
so graciously.'

"`We have been to your residence,' said the first, `and not being so
fortunate as to find you there, and being informed that you were
probably walking in this direction, we followed, in the hope of
overtaking you. Will you please to enter the carriage?'

"The manner of both was imperious, and they both moved, as these
words were spoken, so as to place me between themselves and the
carriage door.  They were armed.  I was not.

"`Gentlemen,' said I, `pardon me; but I usually inquire who does me
the honour to seek my assistance, and what is the nature of the case
to which I am summoned.'

"The reply to this was made by him who had spoken second.
'Doctor, your clients are people of condition.  As to the nature of
the case, our confidence in your skill assures us that you will
ascertain it for yourself better than we can describe it.  Enough.
Will you please to enter the carriage?'

"I could do nothing but comply, and I entered it in silence.  They
both entered after me--the last springing in, after putting up the
steps.  The carriage turned about, and drove on at its former speed.

"I repeat this conversation exactly as it occurred.  I have no doubt
that it is, word for word, the same.  I describe everything exactly
as it took place, constraining my mind not to wander from the task.
Where I make the broken marks that follow here, I leave off for the
time, and put my paper in its hiding-place.

* * * *

"The carriage left the streets behind, passed the North Barrier, and
emerged upon the country road.  At two-thirds of a league from the
Barrier--I did not estimate the distance at that time, but afterwards
when I traversed it--it struck out of the main avenue, and presently
stopped at a solitary house, We all three alighted, and walked, by a
damp soft footpath in a garden where a neglected fountain had
overflowed, to the door of the house.  It was not opened immediately,
in answer to the ringing of the bell, and one of my two conductors
struck the man who opened it, with his heavy riding glove, across the
face.

"There was nothing in this action to attract my particular attention,
for I had seen common people struck more commonly than dogs.
But, the other of the two, being angry likewise, struck the man in
like manner with his arm; the look and bearing of the brothers were
then so exactly alike, that I then first perceived them to be twin
brothers.

"From the time of our alighting at the outer gate (which we found
locked, and which one of the brothers had opened to admit us, and had
relocked), I had heard cries proceeding from an upper chamber.  I was
conducted to this chamber straight, the cries growing louder as we
ascended the stairs, and I found a patient in a high fever of the brain,
lying on a bed.

"The patient was a woman of great beauty, and young; assuredly not
much past twenty.  Her hair was torn and ragged, and her arms were
bound to her sides with sashes and handkerchiefs.  I noticed that
these bonds were all portions of a gentleman's dress.  On one of
them, which was a fringed scarf for a dress of ceremony, I saw the
armorial bearings of a Noble, and the letter E.

"I saw this, within the first minute of my contemplation of the
patient; for, in her restless strivings she had turned over on her
face on the edge of the bed, had drawn the end of the scarf into her
mouth, and was in danger of suffocation.  My first act was to put out
my hand to relieve her breathing; and in moving the scarf aside, the
embroidery in the corner caught my sight.

"I turned her gently over, placed my hands upon her breast to calm
her and keep her down, and looked into her face.  Her eyes were
dilated and wild, and she constantly uttered piercing shrieks, and
repeated the words, `My husband, my father, and my brother!'  and
then counted up to twelve, and said, `Hush!' For an instant, and no
more, she would pause to listen, and then the piercing shrieks would
begin again, and she would repeat the cry, `My husband, my father,
and my brother!' and would count up to twelve, and say, `Hush!' There
was no variation in the order, or the manner.  There was no cessation,
but the regular moment's pause, in the utterance of these sounds.

"`How long,' I asked, `has this lasted?'

"To distinguish the brothers, I will call them the elder and the
younger; by the elder, I mean him who exercised the most authority.
It was the elder who replied, `Since about this hour last night.'

"`She has a husband, a father, and a brother?'

"`A brother.'

"`I do not address her brother?'

"He answered with great contempt, `No.'

"`She has some recent association with the number twelve?'

"The younger brother impatiently rejoined, `With twelve o'clock?'

"`See, gentlemen,' said I, still keeping my hands upon her breast,
'how useless I am, as you have brought me!  If I had known what I was
coming to see, I could have come provided.  As it is, time must be
lost.  There are no medicines to be obtained in this lonely place.'

"The elder brother looked to the younger, who said haughtily, `There
is a case of medicines here;' and brought it from a closet, and put
it on the table.

* * * *

"I opened some of the bottles, smelt them, and put the stoppers to my
lips.  If I had wanted to use anything save narcotic medicines that
were poisons in themselves, I would not have administered any of those.

"`Do you doubt them?' asked the younger brother.

"`You see, monsieur, I am going to use them,' I replied, and said no
more.

"I made the patient swallow, with great difficulty, and after many
efforts, the dose that I desired to give.  As I intended to repeat it
after a while, and as it was necessary to watch its influence, I then
sat down by the side of the bed.  There was a timid and suppressed
woman in attendance (wife of the man down-stairs), who had retreated
into a corner. The house was damp and decayed, indifferently
furnished--evidently, recently occupied and temporarily used.
Some thick old hangings had been nailed up before the windows, to
deaden the sound of the shrieks.  They continued to be uttered in
their regular succession, with the cry, `My husband, my father, and
my brother!'  the counting up to twelve, and `Hush!' The frenzy was
so violent, that I had not unfastened the bandages restraining the
arms; but, I had looked to them, to see that they were not painful.
The only spark of encouragement in the case, was, that my hand upon
the sufferer's breast had this much soothing influence, that for
minutes at a time it tranquillised the figure.  It had no effect upon
the cries; no pendulum could be more regular.

"For the reason that my hand had this effect (I assume), I had sat by
the side of the bed for half an hour, with the two brothers looking
on, before the elder said:

"`There is another patient.'

"I was startled, and asked, `Is it a pressing case?'

"`You had better see,' he carelessly answered; and took up a light.

* * * *

"The other patient lay in a back room across a second staircase,
which was a species of loft over a stable.  There was a low plastered
ceiling to a part of it; the rest was open, to the ridge of the tiled
roof, and there were beams across.  Hay and straw were stored in that
portion of the place, fagots for firing, and a heap of apples in sand.
I had to pass through that part, to get at the other.  My memory is
circumstantial and unshaken.  I try it with these details, and I see
them all, in this my cell in the Bastille, near the close of the
tenth year of my captivity, as I saw them all that night.

"On some hay on the ground, with a cushion thrown under his head, lay
a handsome peasant boy--a boy of not more than seventeen at the most.
He lay on his back, with his teeth set, his right hand clenched on
his breast, and his glaring eyes looking straight upward.  I could
not see where his wound was, as I kneeled on one knee over him;
but, I could see that he was dying of a wound from a sharp point.

"`I am a doctor, my poor fellow,' said I. `Let me examine it.'

"`I do not want it examined,' he answered; `let it be.'

"It was under his hand, and I soothed him to let me move his hand
away.  The wound was a sword-thrust, received from twenty to twenty-
four hours before, but no skill could have saved him if it had been
looked to without delay.  He was then dying fast.  As I turned my
eyes to the elder brother, I saw him looking down at this handsome
boy whose life was ebbing out, as if he were a wounded bird, or hare,
or rabbit; not at all as if he were a fellow-creature.

"`How has this been done, monsieur?' said I.

"`A crazed young common dog!  A serf!  Forced my brother to draw upon him,
and has fallen by my brother's sword--like a gentleman.'

"There was no touch of pity, sorrow, or kindred humanity, in this
answer.  The speaker seemed to acknowledge that it was inconvenient
to have that different order of creature dying there, and that it
would have been better if he had died in the usual obscure routine of
his vermin kind. He was quite incapable of any compassionate feeling
about the boy, or about his fate.

"The boy's eyes had slowly moved to him as he had spoken, and they
now slowly moved to me.

"`Doctor, they are very proud, these Nobles; but we common dogs are
proud too, sometimes.  They plunder us, outrage us, beat us, kill us;
but we have a little pride left, sometimes.  She--have you seen her, Doctor?'

"The shrieks and the cries were audible there, though subdued by the
distance.  He referred to them, as if she were lying in our presence.

"I said, `I have seen her.'

"`She is my sister, Doctor.  They have had their shameful rights,
these Nobles, in the modesty and virtue of our sisters, many years,
but we have had good girls among us.  I know it, and have heard my
father say so. She was a good girl.  She was betrothed to a good
young man, too:  a tenant of his.  We were all tenants of his--that man's
who stands there. The other is his brother, the worst of a bad race.'

"It was with the greatest difficulty that the boy gathered bodily
force to speak; but, his spirit spoke with a dreadful emphasis.

"`We were so robbed by that man who stands there, as an we common
dogs are by those superior Beings--taxed by him without mercy, obliged
to work for him without pay, obliged to grind our corn at his mill,
obliged to feed scores of his tame birds on our wretched crops, and
forbidden for our lives to keep a single tame bird of our own,
pillaged and plundered to that degree that when we chanced to have a
bit of meat, we ate it in fear, with the door barred and the shutters
closed, that his people should not see it and take it from us--I say,
we were so robbed, and hunted, and were made so poor, that our father
told us it was a dreadful thing to bring a child into the world, and
that what we should most pray for, was, that our women might be barren
and our miserable race die out!'

"I had never before seen the sense of being oppressed, bursting forth
like a fire.  I had supposed that it must be latent in the people
somewhere; but, I had never seen it break out, until I saw it in the
dying boy.

"`Nevertheless, Doctor, my sister married.  He was ailing at that
time, poor fellow, and she married her lover, that she might tend and
comfort him in our cottage--our dog-hut, as that man would call it.
She had not been married many weeks, when that man's brother saw her
and admired her, and asked that man to lend her to him--for what are
husbands among us!  He was willing enough, but my sister was good and
virtuous, and hated his brother with a hatred as strong as mine.
What did the two then, to persuade her husband to use his influence
with her, to make her willing?'

"The boy's eyes, which had been fixed on mine, slowly turned to the
looker-on, and I saw in the two faces that all he said was true.
The two opposing kinds of pride confronting one another, I can see,
even in this Bastille; the gentleman's, all negligent indifference;
the peasants, all trodden-down sentiment, and passionate revenge.

"`You know, Doctor, that it is among the Rights of these Nobles to
harness us common dogs to carts, and drive us.  They so harnessed him
and drove him.  You know that it is among their Rights to keep us in
their grounds all night, quieting the frogs, in order that their
noble sleep may not be disturbed.  They kept him out in the unwholesome
mists at night, and ordered him back into his harness in the day.
But he was not persuaded.  No!  Taken out of harness one day at noon,
to feed--if he could find food--he sobbed twelve times, once for
every stroke of the bell, and died on her bosom.'

"Nothing human could have held life in the boy but his determination
to tell all his wrong.  He forced back the gathering shadows of death,
as he forced his clenched right hand to remain clenched, and to cover
his wound.

"`Then, with that man's permission and even with his aid, his brother
took her away; in spite of what I know she must have told his
brother--and what that is, will not be long unknown to you, Doctor,
if it is now--his brother took her away--for his pleasure and
diversion, for a little while.  I saw her pass me on the road.
When I took the tidings home, our father's heart burst; he never
spoke one of the words that fined it.  I took my young sister (for
I have another) to a place beyond the reach of this man, and where,
at least, she will never be HIS vassal.  Then, I tracked the
brother here, and last night climbed in--a common dog, but sword in
hand.--Where is the loft window?  It was somewhere here?'

"The room was darkening to his sight; the world was narrowing around
him.  I glanced about me, and saw that the hay and straw were
trampled over the floor, as if there had been a struggle.

"`She heard me, and ran in.  I told her not to come near us till he
was dead.  He came in and first tossed me some pieces of money; then
struck at me with a whip.  But I, though a common dog, so struck at
him as to make him draw.  Let him break into as many pieces as he
will, the sword that he stained with my common blood; he drew to
defend himself--thrust at me with all his skill for his life.'

"My glance had fallen, but a few moments before, on the fragments of
a broken sword, lying among the hay.  That weapon was a gentleman's.
In another place, lay an old sword that seemed to have been a soldier's.

"`Now, lift me up, Doctor; lift me up.  Where is he?'

"`He is not here,' I said, supporting the boy, and thinking that he
referred to the brother.

"`He!  Proud as these nobles are, he is afraid to see me.  Where is
the man who was here?  turn my face to him.'

"I did so, raising the boy's head against my knee.  But, invested for
the moment with extraordinary power, he raised himself completely:
obliging me to rise too, or I could not have still supported him.

"`Marquis,' said the boy, turned to him with his eyes opened wide,
and his right hand raised, `in the days when all these things are to
be answered for, I summon you and yours, to the last of your bad race,
to answer for them.  I mark this cross of blood upon you, as a sign
that I do it.  In the days when all these things are to be answered
for, I summon your brother, the worst of the bad race, to answer for
them separately. I mark this cross of blood upon him, as a sign that
I do it.'

"Twice, he put his hand to the wound in his breast, and with his
forefinger drew a cross in the air.  He stood for an instant with the
finger yet raised, and as it dropped, he dropped with it, and I laid
him down dead.

* * * *

"When I returned to the bedside of the young woman, I found her
raving in precisely the same order of continuity.  I knew that this
might last for many hours, and that it would probably end in the
silence of the grave.

"I repeated the medicines I had given her, and I sat at the side of
the bed until the night was far advanced.  She never abated the
piercing quality of her shrieks, never stumbled in the distinctness
or the order of her words.  They were always `My husband, my father,
and my brother!  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve. Hush!'

"This lasted twenty-six hours from the time when I first saw her.  I
had come and gone twice, and was again sitting by her, when she began
to falter.  I did what little could be done to assist that opportunity,
and by-and-bye she sank into a lethargy, and lay like the dead.

"It was as if the wind and rain had lulled at last, after a long and
fearful storm.  I released her arms, and called the woman to assist
me to compose her figure and the dress she had tom.  It was then that
I knew her condition to be that of one in whom the first expectations
of being a mother have arisen; and it was then that I lost the little
hope I had had of her.

"`Is she dead?' asked the Marquis, whom I will still describe as the
elder brother, coming booted into the room from his horse.

"`Not dead,' said I; `but like to die.'

"`What strength there is in these common bodies!' he said, looking
down at her with some curiosity.

"`There is prodigious strength,' I answered him, `in sorrow and despair.'

"He first laughed at my words, and then frowned at them.  He moved a
chair with his foot near to mine, ordered the woman away, and said in
a subdued voice,

"`Doctor, finding my brother in this difficulty with these hinds,
I recommended that your aid should be invited.  Your reputation is
high, and, as a young man with your fortune to make, you are probably
mindful of your interest.  The things that you see here, are things
to be seen, and not spoken of.'

"I listened to the patient's breathing, and avoided answering.

"`Do you honour me with your attention, Doctor?'

"`Monsieur,' said I, `in my profession, the communications of
patients are always received in confidence.' I was guarded in my
answer, for I was troubled in my mind with what I had heard and seen.

"Her breathing was so difficult to trace, that I carefully tried the
pulse and the heart.  There was life, and no more.  Looking round as
I resumed my seat, I found both the brothers intent upon me.

* * * *

"I write with so much difficulty, the cold is so severe, I am so
fearful of being detected and consigned to an underground cell and
total darkness, that I must abridge this narrative.  There is no
confusion or failure in my memory; it can recall, and could detail,
every word that was ever spoken between me and those brothers.

"She lingered for a week.  Towards the last, I could understand some
few syllables that she said to me, by placing my ear close to her lips.
She asked me where she was, and I told her; who I was, and I told her.
It was in vain that I asked her for her family name.  She faintly
shook her head upon the pillow, and kept her secret, as the boy had done.

"I had no opportunity of asking her any question, until I had told
the brothers she was sinking fast, and could not live another day.
Until then, though no one was ever presented to her consciousness
save the woman and myself, one or other of them had always jealously
sat behind the curtain at the head of the bed when I was there.
But when it came to that, they seemed careless what communication I
might hold with her; as if--the thought passed through my mind--I
were dying too.

"I always observed that their pride bitterly resented the younger
brother's (as I call him) having crossed swords with a peasant, and
that peasant a boy.  The only consideration that appeared to affect
the mind of either of them was the consideration that this was highly
degrading to the family, and was ridiculous.  As often as I caught
the younger brother's eyes, their expression reminded me that he
disliked me deeply, for knowing what I knew from the boy.  He was
smoother and more polite to me than the elder; but I saw this.
I also saw that I was an incumbrance in the mind of the elder, too.

"My patient died, two hours before midnight--at a time, by my watch,
answering almost to the minute when I had first seen her.  I was
alone with her, when her forlorn young head drooped gently on one
side, and all her earthly wrongs and sorrows ended.

"The brothers were waiting in a room down-stairs, impatient to ride
away.  I had heard them, alone at the bedside, striking their boots
with their riding-whips, and loitering up and down.

"`At last she is dead?' said the elder, when I went in.

"'She is dead,' said I.

"`I congratulate you, my brother,'were his words as he turned round.

"He had before offered me money, which I had postponed taking.  He
now gave me a rouleau of gold.  I took it from his hand, but laid it
on the table.  I had considered the question, and had resolved to
accept nothing.

"`Pray excuse me,' said I. `Under the circumstances, no.'

"They exchanged looks, but bent their heads to me as I bent mine to
them, and we parted without another word on either side.

* * * *

"I am weary, weary, weary-worn down by misery.  I cannot read what I
have written with this gaunt hand.

"Early in the morning, the rouleau of gold was left at my door in a
little box, with my name on the outside.  From the first, I had
anxiously considered what I ought to do.  I decided, that day, to
write privately to the Minister, stating the nature of the two cases
to which I had been summoned, and the place to which I had gone:  in
effect, stating all the circumstances.  I knew what Court influence
was, and what the immunities of the Nobles were, and I expected that
the matter would never be heard of; but, I wished to relieve my own
mind.  I had kept the matter a profound secret, even from my wife;
and this, too, I resolved to state in my letter.  I had no apprehension
whatever of my real danger; but I was conscious that there might be
danger for others, if others were compromised by possessing the
knowledge that I possessed.

"I was much engaged that day, and could not complete my letter that
night.  I rose long before my usual time next morning to finish it.
It was the last day of the year.  The letter was lying before me just
completed, when I was told that a lady waited, who wished to see me.

* * * *

"I am growing more and more unequal to the task I have set myself.
It is so cold, so dark, my senses are so benumbed, and the gloom upon
me is so dreadful.

"The lady was young, engaging, and handsome, but not marked for long
life.  She was in great agitation.  She presented herself to me as
the wife of the Marquis St. Evremonde.  I connected the title by
which the boy had addressed the elder brother, with the initial
letter embroidered on the scarf, and had no difficulty in arriving at
the conclusion that I had seen that nobleman very lately.

"My memory is still accurate, but I cannot write the words of our
conversation.  I suspect that I am watched more closely than I was,
and I know not at what times I may be watched.  She had in part
suspected, and in part discovered, the main facts of the cruel story,
of her husband's share in it, and my being resorted to.  She did not
know that the girl was dead.  Her hope had been, she said in great
distress, to show her, in secret, a woman's sympathy.  Her hope had
been to avert the wrath of Heaven from a House that had long been
hateful to the suffering many.

"She had reasons for believing that there was a young sister living,
and her greatest desire was, to help that sister.  I could tell her
nothing but that there was such a sister; beyond that, I knew nothing.
Her inducement to come to me, relying on my confidence, had been the
hope that I could tell her the name and place of abode.  Whereas,
to this wretched hour I am ignorant of both.

* * * *

"These scraps of paper fail me.  One was taken from me, with a
warning, yesterday.  I must finish my record to-day.

"She was a good, compassionate lady, and not happy in her marriage.
How could she be!  The brother distrusted and disliked her, and his
influence was all opposed to her; she stood in dread of him, and in
dread of her husband too.  When I handed her down to the door, there
was a child, a pretty boy from two to three years old, in her carriage.

"`For his sake, Doctor,' she said, pointing to him in tears, `I would
do all I can to make what poor amends I can.  He will never prosper
in his inheritance otherwise.  I have a presentiment that if no other
innocent atonement is made for this, it will one day be required of
him.  What I have left to call my own--it is little beyond the worth
of a few jewels--I will make it the first charge of his life to
bestow, with the compassion and lamenting of his dead mother, on this
injured family, if the sister can be discovered.'

"She kissed the boy, and said, caressing him, `It is for thine own
dear sake.  Thou wilt be faithful, little Charles?' The child
answered her bravely, `Yes!' I kissed her hand, and she took him in
her arms, and went away caressing him.  I never saw her more.

"As she had mentioned her husband's name in the faith that I knew it,
I added no mention of it to my letter.  I sealed my letter, and, not
trusting it out of my own hands, delivered it myself that day.

"That night, the last night of the year, towards nine o'clock, a man
in a black dress rang at my gate, demanded to see me, and softly
followed my servant, Ernest Defarge, a youth, up-stairs.  When my
servant came into the room where I sat with my wife--O my wife,
beloved of my heart!  My fair young English wife!--we saw the man,
who was supposed to be at the gate, standing silent behind him.

"An urgent case in the Rue St. Honore, he said.  It would not detain
me, he had a coach in waiting.

"It brought me here, it brought me to my grave.  When I was clear of
the house, a black muffler was drawn tightly over my mouth from
behind, and my arms were pinioned.  The two brothers crossed the road
from a dark corner, and identified me with a single gesture.  The
Marquis took from his pocket the letter I had written, showed it me,
burnt it in the light of a lantern that was held, and extinguished
the ashes with his foot.  Not a word was spoken.  I was brought here,
I was brought to my living grave.

"If it had pleased GOD to put it in the hard heart of either of the
brothers, in all these frightful years, to grant me any tidings of my
dearest wife--so much as to let me know by a word whether alive or
dead--I might have thought that He had not quite abandoned them.
But, now I believe that the mark of the red cross is fatal to them,
and that they have no part in His mercies.  And them and their
descendants, to the last of their race, I, Alexandre Manette, unhappy
prisoner, do this last night of the year 1767, in my unbearable agony,
denounce to the times when all these things shall be answered for.
I denounce them to Heaven and to earth."



A terrible sound arose when the reading of this document was done. A
sound of craving and eagerness that had nothing articulate in it but
blood.  The narrative called up the most revengeful passions of the
time, and there was not a head in the nation but must have dropped
before it.

Little need, in presence of that tribunal and that auditory, to &how
how the Defarges had not made the paper public, with the other
captured Bastille memorials borne in procession, and had kept it,
biding their time.  Little need to show that this detested family
name had long been anathematised by Saint Antoine, and was wrought
into the fatal register.  The man never trod ground whose virtues and
services would have sustained him in that place that day, against
such denunciation.

And all the worse for the doomed man, that the denouncer was a
well-known citizen, his own attached friend, the father of his wife.
One of the frenzied aspirations of the populace was, for imitations
of the questionable public virtues of antiquity, and for sacrifices
and self-immolations on the people's altar.  Therefore when the
President said (else had his own head quivered on his shoulders),
that the good physician of the Republic would deserve better still of
the Republic by rooting out an obnoxious family of Aristocrats, and
would doubtless feel a sacred glow and joy in making his daughter a
widow and her child an orphan, there was wild excitement, patriotic
fervour, not a touch of human sympathy.

"Much influence around him, has that Doctor?" murmured Madame Defarge,
smiling to The Vengeance.  "Save him now, my Doctor, save him!"

At every juryman's vote, there was a roar.  Another and another.
Roar and roar.

Unanimously voted.  At heart and by descent an Aristocrat, an enemy
of the Republic, a notorious oppressor of the People.  Back to the
Conciergerie, and Death within four-and-twenty hours!



XI

Dusk


The wretched wife of the innocent man thus doomed to die, fell under
the sentence, as if she had been mortally stricken.  But, she uttered
no sound; and so strong was the voice within her, representing that
it was she of all the world who must uphold him in his misery and not
augment it, that it quickly raised her, even from that shock.

The Judges having to take part in a public demonstration out of
doors, the Tribunal adjourned.  The quick noise and movement of the
court's emptying itself by many passages had not ceased, when Lucie
stood stretching out her arms towards her husband, with nothing in
her face but love and consolation.

"If I might touch him!  If I might embrace him once!  O, good citizens,
if you would have so much compassion for us!"

There was but a gaoler left, along with two of the four men who had
taken him last night, and Barsad.  The people had all poured out to
the show in the streets.  Barsad proposed to the rest, "Let her
embrace him then; it is but a moment."  It was silently acquiesced in,
and they passed her over the seats in the hall to a raised place,
where he, by leaning over the dock, could fold her in his arms.

"Farewell, dear darling of my soul.  My parting blessing on my love.
We shall meet again, where the weary are at rest!"

They were her husband's words, as he held her to his bosom.

"I can bear it, dear Charles.  I am supported from above:  don't
suffer for me.  A parting blessing for our chad."

"I send it to her by you.  I kiss her by you.  I say farewell to her by you."

"My husband.  No! A moment!"  He was tearing himself apart from her.
"We shall not be separated long.  I feel that this will break my heart
by-and-bye; but I will do my duty while I can, and when I leave her,
God will raise up friends for her, as He did for me."

Her father had followed her, and would have fallen on his knees to
both of them, but that Darnay put out a hand and seized him, crying:

"No, no!  What have you done, what have you done, that you should
kneel to us!  We know now, what a struggle you made of old.  We know,
now what you underwent when you suspected my descent, and when you
knew it.  We know now, the natural antipathy you strove against, and
conquered, for her dear sake.  We thank you with all our hearts, and
all our love and duty.  Heaven be with you!"

Her father's only answer was to draw his hands through his white hair,
and wring them with a shriek of anguish.

"It could not be otherwise," said the prisoner.  "All things have
worked together as they have fallen out. it was the always-vain
endeavour to discharge my poor mother's trust that first brought my
fatal presence near you.  Good could never come of such evil,
a happier end was not in nature to so unhappy a beginning.  Be comforted,
and forgive me.  Heaven bless you!"

As he was drawn away, his wife released him, and stood looking after
him with her hands touching one another in the attitude of prayer,
and with a radiant look upon her face, in which there was even a
comforting smile.  As he went out at the prisoners' door, she turned,
laid her head lovingly on her father's breast, tried to speak to him,
and fell at his feet.

Then, issuing from the obscure corner from which he had never moved,
Sydney Carton came and took her up.  Only her father and Mr. Lorry
were with her.  His arm trembled as it raised her, and supported her head.
Yet, there was an air about him that was not all of pity--that had a flush
of pride in it.

"Shall I take her to a coach?  I shall never feel her weight."

He carried her lightly to the door, and laid her tenderly down in a
coach.  Her father and their old friend got into it, and he took his
seat beside the driver.

When they arrived at the gateway where he had paused in the dark not
many hours before, to picture to himself on which of the rough stones
of the street her feet had trodden, he lifted her again, and carried
her up the staircase to their rooms.  There, he laid her down on a
couch, where her child and Miss Pross wept over her.

"Don't recall her to herself," he said, softly, to the latter, "she is
better so.  Don't revive her to consciousness, while she only faints."

"Oh, Carton, Carton, dear Carton!" cried little Lucie, springing up
and throwing her arms passionately round him, in a burst of grief.
"Now that you have come, I think you will do something to help mamma,
something to save papa!  O, look at her, dear Carton!  Can you, of all
the people who love her, bear to see her so?"

He bent over the child, and laid her blooming cheek against his face.
He put her gently from him, and looked at her unconscious mother.

"Before I go," he said, and paused--"I may kiss her?"

It was remembered afterwards that when he bent down and touched her
face with his lips, he murmured some words.  The child, who was
nearest to him, told them afterwards, and told her grandchildren when
she was a handsome old lady, that she heard him say, "A life you love."

When he had gone out into the next room, he turned suddenly on
Mr. Lorry and her father, who were following, and said to the latter:

"You had great influence but yesterday, Doctor Manette; let it at
least be tried.  These judges, and all the men in power, are very
friendly to you, and very recognisant of your services; are they not?"

"Nothing connected with Charles was concealed from me.  I had the
strongest assurances that I should save him; and I did."  He returned
the answer in great trouble, and very slowly.

"Try them again.  The hours between this and to-morrow afternoon are
few and short, but try."

"I intend to try.  I will not rest a moment."

"That's well.  I have known such energy as yours do great things
before now--though never," he added, with a smile and a sigh together,
"such great things as this.  But try!  Of little worth as life is when
we misuse it, it is worth that effort.  It would cost nothing to lay
down if it were not."

"I will go," said Doctor Manette, "to the Prosecutor and the President
straight, and I will go to others whom it is better not to name.
I will write too, and--But stay!  There is a Celebration in the streets,
and no one will be accessible until dark."

"That's true.  Well!  It is a forlorn hope at the best, and not much
the forlorner for being delayed till dark.  I should like to know how
you speed; though, mind!  I expect nothing!  When are you likely to
have seen these dread powers, Doctor Manette?"

"Immediately after dark, I should hope.  Within an hour or two from this."

"It will be dark soon after four.  Let us stretch the hour or two.
If I go to Mr. Lorry's at nine, shall I hear what you have done,
either from our friend or from yourself?"

"Yes."

"May you prosper!"

Mr. Lorry followed Sydney to the outer door, and, touching him on the
shoulder as he was going away, caused him to turn.

"I have no hope," said Mr. Lorry, in a low and sorrowful whisper.

"Nor have I."

"If any one of these men, or all of these men, were disposed to spare
him--which is a large supposition; for what is his life, or any man's
to them!--I doubt if they durst spare him after the demonstration in
the court."

"And so do I. I heard the fall of the axe in that sound."

Mr. Lorry leaned his arm upon the door-post, and bowed his face upon it.

"Don't despond," said Carton, very gently; "don't grieve.
I encouraged Doctor Manette in this idea, because I felt that it
might one day be consolatory to her.  Otherwise, she might think `his
life was want only thrown away or wasted,' and that might trouble her."

"Yes, yes, yes," returned Mr. Lorry, drying his eyes, "you are
right. But he will perish; there is no real hope."

"Yes.  He will perish:  there is no real hope," echoed Carton.

And walked with a settled step, down-stairs.



XII

Darkness


Sydney Carton paused in the street, not quite decided where to go.
"At Tellson's banking-house at nine," he said, with a musing face.
"Shall I do well, in the mean time, to show myself?  I think so.
It is best that these people should know there is such a man as I
here; it is a sound precaution, and may be a necessary preparation.
But care, care, care!  Let me think it out!"

Checking his steps which had begun to tend towards an object, he took
a turn or two in the already darkening street, and traced the thought
in his mind to its possible consequences.  His first impression was
confirmed.  "It is best," he said, finally resolved, "that these
people should know there is such a man as I here."  And he turned his
face towards Saint Antoine.

Defarge had described himself, that day, as the keeper of a wine-shop
in the Saint Antoine suburb.  It was not difficult for one who knew
the city well, to find his house without asking any question.  Having
ascertained its situation, Carton came out of those closer streets
again, and dined at a place of refreshment and fell sound asleep
after dinner.  For the first time in many years, he had no strong drink.
Since last night he had taken nothing but a little light thin wine,
and last night he had dropped the brandy slowly down on Mr. Lorry's
hearth like a man who had done with it.

It was as late as seven o'clock when he awoke refreshed, and went out
into the streets again.  As he passed along towards Saint Antoine, he
stopped at a shop-window where there was a mirror, and slightly
altered the disordered arrangement of his loose cravat, and his coat-
collar, and his wild hair.  This done, he went on direct to Defarge's,
and went in.

There happened to be no customer in the shop but Jacques Three,
of the restless fingers and the croaking voice.  This man, whom he
had seen upon the Jury, stood drinking at the little counter, in
conversation with the Defarges, man and wife.  The Vengeance assisted
in the conversation, like a regular member of the establishment.

As Carton walked in, took his seat and asked (in very indifferent
French) for a small measure of wine, Madame Defarge cast a careless
glance at him, and then a keener, and then a keener, and then
advanced to him herself, and asked him what it was he had ordered.

He repeated what he had already said.

"English?" asked Madame Defarge, inquisitively raising her dark eyebrows.

After looking at her, as if the sound of even a single French word
were slow to express itself to him, he answered, in his former strong
foreign accent.  "Yes, madame, yes.  I am English!"

Madame Defarge returned to her counter to get the wine, and, as he
took up a Jacobin journal and feigned to pore over it puzzling out
its meaning, he heard her say, "I swear to you, like Evremonde!"

Defarge brought him the wine, and gave him Good Evening.

"How?"

"Good evening."

"Oh!  Good evening, citizen," filling his glass.  "Ah! and good wine.
I drink to the Republic."

Defarge went back to the counter, and said, "Certainly, a little
like."  Madame sternly retorted, "I tell you a good deal like."
Jacques Three pacifically remarked, "He is so much in your mind,
see you, madame."  The amiable Vengeance added, with a laugh, "Yes,
my faith!  And you are looking forward with so much pleasure to seeing
him once more to-morrow!"

Carton followed the lines and words of his paper, with a slow
forefinger, and with a studious and absorbed face.  They were all
leaning their arms on the counter close together, speaking low.
After a silence of a few moments, during which they all looked
towards him without disturbing his outward attention from the Jacobin
editor, they resumed their conversation.

"It is true what madame says," observed Jacques Three.  "Why stop?
There is great force in that.  Why stop?"

"Well, well," reasoned Defarge, "but one must stop somewhere.
After all, the question is still where?"

"At extermination," said madame.

"Magnificent!" croaked Jacques Three.  The Vengeance, also, highly approved.

"Extermination is good doctrine, my wife," said Defarge, rather
troubled; "in general, I say nothing against it.  But this Doctor has
suffered much; you have seen him to-day; you have observed his face
when the paper was read."

"I have observed his face!" repeated madame, contemptuously and
angrily.  "Yes.  I have observed his face.  I have observed his face
to be not the face of a true friend of the Republic.  Let him take
care of his face!"

"And you have observed, my wife," said Defarge, in a deprecatory
manner, "the anguish of his daughter, which must be a dreadful
anguish to him!"

"I have observed his daughter," repeated madame; "yes, I have
observed his daughter, more times than one.  I have observed her
to-day, and I have observed her other days.  I have observed her
in the court, and I have observed her in the street by the prison.
Let me but lift my finger--!"  She seemed to raise it (the listener's
eyes were always on his paper), and to let it fall with a rattle on
the ledge before her, as if the axe had dropped.

"The citizeness is superb!" croaked the Juryman.

"She is an Angel!" said The Vengeance, and embraced her.

"As to thee," pursued madame, implacably, addressing her husband,
"if it depended on thee--which, happily, it does not--thou wouldst
rescue this man even now."

"No!" protested Defarge.  "Not if to lift this glass would do it!
But I would leave the matter there.  I say, stop there."

"See you then, Jacques," said Madame Defarge, wrathfully; "and see
you, too, my little Vengeance; see you both!  Listen!  For other crimes
as tyrants and oppressors, I have this race a long time on my register,
doomed to destruction and extermination.  Ask my husband, is that so."

"It is so," assented Defarge, without being asked.

"In the beginning of the great days, when the Bastille falls, he
finds this paper of to-day, and he brings it home, and in the middle
of the night when this place is clear and shut, we read it, here on
this spot, by the light of this lamp.  Ask him, is that so."

"It is so," assented Defarge.

"That night, I tell him, when the paper is read through, and the lamp
is burnt out, and the day is gleaming in above those shutters and
between those iron bars, that I have now a secret to communicate.
Ask him, is that so."

"It is so," assented Defarge again.

"I communicate to him that secret.  I smite this bosom with these two
hands as I smite it now, and I tell him, `Defarge, I was brought up
among the fishermen of the sea-shore, and that peasant family so
injured by the two Evremonde brothers, as that Bastille paper describes,
is my family.  Defarge, that sister of the mortally wounded boy upon
the ground was my sister, that husband was my sister's husband, that
unborn child was their child, that brother was my brother, that
father was my father, those dead are my dead, and that summons to
answer for those things descends to me!' Ask him, is that so."

"It is so," assented Defarge once more.

"Then tell Wind and Fire where to stop," returned madame; "but don't tell me."

Both her hearers derived a horrible enjoyment from the deadly nature
of her wrath--the listener could feel how white she was, without
seeing her--and both highly commended it.  Defarge, a weak minority,
interposed a few words for the memory of the compassionate wife of
the Marquis; but only elicited from his own wife a repetition of her
last reply.  "Tell the Wind and the Fire where to stop; not me!"

Customers entered, and the group was broken up.  The English customer
paid for what he had had, perplexedly counted his change, and asked,
as a stranger, to be directed towards the National Palace.
Madame Defarge took him to the door, and put her arm on his, in
pointing out the road.  The English customer was not without his
reflections then, that it might be a good deed to seize that arm,
lift it, and strike under it sharp and deep.

But, he went his way, and was soon swallowed up in the shadow of the
prison wan.  At the appointed hour, he emerged from it to present
himself in Mr. Lorry's room again, where he found the old gentleman
walking to and fro in restless anxiety.  He said he had been with
Lucie until just now, and had only left her for a few minutes, to
come and keep his appointment.  Her father had not been seen, since
he quitted the banking-house towards four o'clock.  She had some
faint hopes that his mediation might save Charles, but they were very
slight.  He had been more than five hours gone:  where could he be?

Mr. Lorry waited until ten; but, Doctor Manette not returning, and he
being unwilling to leave Lucie any longer, it was arranged that he
should go back to her, and come to the banking-house again at midnight.
In the meanwhile, Carton would wait alone by the fire for the Doctor.

He waited and waited, and the clock struck twelve; but Doctor Manette
did not come back.  Mr. Lorry returned, and found no tidings of him,
and brought none.  Where could he be?

They were discussing this question, and were almost building up some
weak structure of hope on his prolonged absence, when they heard him
on the stairs.  The instant he entered the room, it was plain that
all was lost.

Whether he had really been to any one, or whether be had been all
that time traversing the streets, was never known.  As he stood
staring at them, they asked him no question, for his face told them
everything.

"I cannot find it," said he, "and I must have it.  Where is it?"

His head and throat were bare, and, as he spoke with a helpless look
straying all around, he took his coat off, and let it drop on the floor.

"Where is my bench?  I have been looking everywhere for my bench, and
I can't find it.  What have they done with my work?  Time presses:
I must finish those shoes."

They looked at one another, and their hearts died within them.

"Come, come!" said he, in a whimpering miserable way; "let me get to work.
Give me my work."

Receiving no answer, he tore his hair, and beat his feet upon the ground,
like a distracted child.

"Don't torture a poor forlorn wretch," he implored them, with a dreadful cry;
"but give me my work!  What is to become of us, if those shoes are not done
to-night?"

Lost, utterly lost!

It was so clearly beyond hope to reason with him, or try to restore him,
that--as if by agreement--they each put a hand upon his shoulder,
and soothed him to sit down before the fire, with a promise that he
should have his work presently.  He sank into the chair, and brooded
over the embers, and shed tears.  As if all that had happened since
the garret time were a momentary fancy, or a dream, Mr. Lorry saw him
shrink into the exact figure that Defarge had had in keeping.

Affected, and impressed with terror as they both were, by this
spectacle of ruin, it was not a time to yield to such emotions.
His lonely daughter, bereft of her final hope and reliance, appealed
to them both too strongly. Again, as if by agreement, they looked at
one another with one meaning in their faces.
Carton was the first to speak:

"The last chance is gone:  it was not much.  Yes; he had better be
taken to her.  But, before you go, will you, for a moment, steadily
attend to me?  Don't ask me why I make the stipulations I am going to
make, and exact the promise I am going to exact; I have a reason--
a good one."

"I do not doubt it," answered Mr. Lorry.  "Say on."

The figure in the chair between them, was all the time monotonously
rocking itself to and fro, and moaning.  They spoke in such a tone as
they would have used if they had been watching by a sick-bed in the night.

Carton stooped to pick up the coat, which lay almost entangling his feet.
As he did so, a small case in which the Doctor was accustomed to
carry the lists of his day's duties, fen lightly on the floor.
Carton took it up, and there was a folded paper in it.  "We should
look at this!" he said. Mr. Lorry nodded his consent.  He opened it,
and exclaimed, "Thank GOD!"

"What is it?" asked Mr. Lorry, eagerly.

"A moment!  Let me speak of it in its place.  First," he put his hand
in his coat, and took another paper from it, "that is the certificate
which enables me to pass out of this city.  Look at it.  You see--
Sydney Carton, an Englishman?"

Mr. Lorry held it open in his hand, gazing in his earnest face.

"Keep it for me until to-morrow.  I shall see him to-morrow,
you remember, and I had better not take it into the prison."

"Why not?"

"I don't know; I prefer not to do so.  Now, take this paper that
Doctor Manette has carried about him.  It is a similar certificate,
enabling him and his daughter and her child, at any time, to pass the
barrier and the frontier!  You see?"

"Yes!"

"Perhaps he obtained it as his last and utmost precaution against
evil, yesterday.  When is it dated?  But no matter; don't stay to look;
put it up carefully with mine and your own.  Now, observe!  I never
doubted until within this hour or two, that he had, or could have
such a paper. It is good, until recalled.  But it may be soon recalled,
and, I have reason to think, will be."

"They are not in danger?"

"They are in great danger.  They are in danger of denunciation by
Madame Defarge.  I know it from her own lips.  I have overheard words
of that woman's, to-night, which have presented their danger to me in
strong colours.  I have lost no time, and since then, I have seen the
spy. He confirms me.  He knows that a wood-sawyer, living by the
prison wall, is under the control of the Defarges, and has been
rehearsed by Madame Defarge as to his having seen Her"--he never
mentioned Lucie's name--"making signs and signals to prisoners.
It is easy to foresee that the pretence will be the common one, a
prison plot, and that it will involve her life--and perhaps her
child's--and perhaps her father's--for both have been seen with her
at that place.  Don't look so horrified.  You will save them all."

"Heaven grant I may, Carton!  But how?"

"I am going to tell you how.  It will depend on you, and it could
depend on no better man.  This new denunciation will certainly not
take place until after to-morrow; probably not until two or three
days afterwards; more probably a week afterwards.  You know it is a
capital crime, to mourn for, or sympathise with, a victim of the
Guillotine.  She and her father would unquestionably be guilty of
this crime, and this woman (the inveteracy of whose pursuit cannot
be described) would wait to add that strength to her case, and make
herself doubly sure. You follow me?"

"So attentively, and with so much confidence in what you say, that
for the moment I lose sight," touching the back of the Doctor's
chair, even of this distress."

"You have money, and can buy the means of travelling to the seacoast
as quickly as the journey can be made.  Your preparations have been
completed for some days, to return to England.  Early to-morrow have
your horses ready, so that they may be in starting trim at two o'clock
in the afternoon."

"It shall be done!"

His manner was so fervent and inspiring, that Mr. Lorry caught the
flame, and was as quick as youth.

"You are a noble heart.  Did I say we could depend upon no better man?
Tell her, to-night, what you know of her danger as involving her
child and her father.  Dwell upon that, for she would lay her own
fair head beside her husband's cheerfully."  He faltered for an instant;
then went on as before.  "For the sake of her child and her father,
press upon her the necessity of leaving Paris, with them and you,
at that hour.  Tell her that it was her husband's last arrangement.
Tell her that more depends upon it than she dare believe, or hope.
You think that her father, even in this sad state, will submit
himself to her; do you not?"

"I am sure of it."

"I thought so.  Quietly and steadily have all these arrangements made
in the courtyard here, even to the taking of your own seat in the
carriage. The moment I come to you, take me in, and drive away."

"I understand that I wait for you under all circumstances?"

"You have my certificate in your hand with the rest, you know,
and will reserve my place.  Wait for nothing but to have my place
occupied, and then for England!"

"Why, then," said Mr. Lorry, grasping his eager but so firm and
steady hand, "it does not all depend on one old man, but I shall have
a young and ardent man at my side."

"By the help of Heaven you shall!  Promise me solemnly that nothing
will influence you to alter the course on which we now stand pledged
to one another."

"Nothing, Carton."

"Remember these words to-morrow:  change the course, or delay in it--
for any reason--and no life can possibly be saved, and many lives
must inevitably be sacrificed."

"I will remember them.  I hope to do my part faithfully."

"And I hope to do mine.  Now, good bye!"

Though he said it with a grave smile of earnestness, and though he
even put the old man's hand to his lips, he did not part from him
then. He helped him so far to arouse the rocking figure before the
dying embers, as to get a cloak and hat put upon it, and to tempt it
forth to find where the bench and work were hidden that it still
moaningly besought to have.  He walked on the other side of it and
protected it to the courtyard of the house where the afflicted
heart--so happy in the memorable time when he had revealed his own
desolate heart to it--outwatched the awful night.  He entered the
courtyard and remained there for a few moments alone, looking up at
the light in the window of her room.  Before he went away, he
breathed a blessing towards it, and a Farewell.



XIII

Fifty-two


In the black prison of the Conciergerie, the doomed of the day
awaited their fate.  They were in number as the weeks of the year.
Fifty-two were to roll that afternoon on the life-tide of the city to
the boundless everlasting sea.  Before their cells were quit of them,
new occupants were appointed; before their blood ran into the blood
spilled yesterday, the blood that was to mingle with theirs to-morrow
was already set apart.

Two score and twelve were told off.  From the farmer-general of seventy,
whose riches could not buy his life, to the seamstress of twenty,
whose poverty and obscurity could not save her.  Physical diseases,
engendered in the vices and neglects of men, will seize on victims
of all degrees; and the frightful moral disorder, born of unspeakable
suffering, intolerable oppression, and heartless indifference,
smote equally without distinction.

Charles Darnay, alone in a cell, had sustained himself with
no flattering delusion since he came to it from the Tribunal.
In every line of the narrative he had heard, he had heard his condemnation.
He had fully comprehended that no personal influence could possibly save him,
that he was virtually sentenced by the millions, and that units could
avail him nothing.

Nevertheless, it was not easy, with the face of his beloved wife
fresh before him, to compose his mind to what it must bear.  His hold
on life was strong, and it was very, very hard, to loosen; by gradual
efforts and degrees unclosed a little here, it clenched the tighter
there; and when he brought his strength to bear on that hand and it
yielded, this was closed again.  There was a hurry, too, in all his
thoughts, a turbulent and heated working of his heart, that contended
against resignation.  If, for a moment, he did feel resigned, then
his wife and child who had to live after him, seemed to protest and
to make it a selfish thing.

But, all this was at first.  Before long, the consideration that
there was no disgrace in the fate he must meet, and that numbers went
the same road wrongfully, and trod it firmly every day, sprang up to
stimulate him.  Next followed the thought that much of the future
peace of mind enjoyable by the dear ones, depended on his quiet
fortitude.  So, by degrees he calmed into the better state, when he
could raise his thoughts much higher, and draw comfort down.

Before it had set in dark on the night of his condemnation, he had
travelled thus far on his last way.  Being allowed to purchase the
means of writing, and a light, he sat down to write until such time
as the prison lamps should be extinguished.

He wrote a long letter to Lucie, showing her that he had known
nothing of her father's imprisonment, until he had heard of it from
herself, and that he had been as ignorant as she of his father's and
uncle's responsibility for that misery, until the paper had been read.
He had already explained to her that his concealment from herself of
the name he had relinquished, was the one condition--fully
intelligible now--that her father had attached to their betrothal,
and was the one promise he had still exacted on the morning of their
marriage.  He entreated her, for her father's sake, never to seek to
know whether her father had become oblivious of the existence of the
paper, or had had it recalled to him (for the moment, or for good),
by the story of the Tower, on that old Sunday under the dear old
plane-tree in the garden.  If he had preserved any definite remembrance
of it, there could be no doubt that he had supposed it destroyed with
the Bastille, when he had found no mention of it among the relics of
prisoners which the populace had discovered there, and which had been
described to all the world.  He besought her--though he added that he
knew it was needless--to console her father, by impressing him
through every tender means she could think of, with the truth that he
had done nothing for which he could justly reproach himself, but had
uniformly forgotten himself for their joint sakes.  Next to her
preservation of his own last grateful love and blessing, and her
overcoming of her sorrow, to devote herself to their dear child,
he adjured her, as they would meet in Heaven, to comfort her father.

To her father himself, he wrote in the same strain; but, he told her
father that he expressly confided his wife and child to his care.
And he told him this, very strongly, with the hope of rousing him
from any despondency or dangerous retrospect towards which he foresaw
he might be tending.

To Mr. Lorry, he commended them all, and explained his worldly affairs.
That done, with many added sentences of grateful friendship and warm
attachment, all was done.  He never thought of Carton.  His mind was
so full of the others, that he never once thought of him.

He had time to finish these letters before the lights were put out.
When he lay down on his straw bed, he thought he had done with this world.

But, it beckoned him back in his sleep, and showed itself in shining
forms.  Free and happy, back in the old house in Soho (though it had
nothing in it like the real house), unaccountably released and light
of heart, he was with Lucie again, and she told him it was all a dream,
and he had never gone away.  A pause of forgetfulness, and then he
had even suffered, and had come back to her, dead and at peace, and yet
there was no difference in him.  Another pause of oblivion, and he
awoke in the sombre morning, unconscious where he was or what had
happened, until it flashed upon his mind, "this is the day of my death!"

Thus, had he come through the hours, to the day when the fifty-two
heads were to fall.  And now, while he was composed, and hoped that
he could meet the end with quiet heroism, a new action began in his
waking thoughts, which was very difficult to master.

He had never seen the instrument that was to terminate his life.
How high it was from the ground, how many steps it had, where he
would be stood, bow he would be touched, whether the touching hands
would be dyed red, which way his face would be turned, whether he
would be the first, or might be the last:  these and many similar
questions, in nowise directed by his will, obtruded themselves over
and over again, countless times.  Neither were they connected with
fear:  he was conscious of no fear.  Rather, they originated in a
strange besetting desire to know what to do when the time came;
a desire gigantically disproportionate to the few swift moments to
which it referred; a wondering that was more like the wondering of
some other spirit within his, than his own.

The hours went on as he walked to and fro, and the clocks struck the
numbers he would never hear again.  Nine gone for ever, ten gone for
ever, eleven gone for ever, twelve coming on to pass away.  After a
hard contest with that eccentric action of thought which had last
perplexed him, he had got the better of it.  He walked up and down,
softly repeating their names to himself.  The worst of the strife was
over.  He could walk up and down, free from distracting fancies,
praying for himself and for them.

Twelve gone for ever.

He had been apprised that the final hour was Three, and be knew he
would be summoned some time earlier, inasmuch as the tumbrils jolted
heavily and slowly through the streets.  Therefore, he resolved to keep
Two before his mind, as the hour, and so to strengthen himself in the
interval that he might be able, after that time, to strengthen others.

Walking regularly to and fro with his arms folded on his breast,
a very different man from the prisoner, who had walked to and fro at
La Force, he heard One struck away from him, without surprise.
The hour had measured like most other hours.  Devoutly thankful to
Heaven for his recovered self-possession, he thought, "There is but
another now," and turned to walk again.

Footsteps in the stone passage outside the door.  He stopped.

The key was put in the lock, and turned.  Before the door was opened,
or as it opened, a man said in a low voice, in English:  "He has never
seen me here; I have kept out of his way.  Go you in alone; I wait near.
Lose no time!"

The door was quickly opened and closed, and there stood before him
face to face, quiet, intent upon him, with the light of a smile on
his features, and a cautionary finger on his lip, Sydney Carton.

There was something so bright and remarkable in his look, that, for
the first moment, the prisoner misdoubted him to be an apparition of
his own imagining.  But, he spoke, and it was his voice; he took the
prisoner's hand, and it was his real grasp.

"Of all the people upon earth, you least expected to see me?"  be said.

"I could not believe it to be you.  I can scarcely believe it now.
You are not"--the apprehension came suddenly into his mind--"a prisoner?"

"No.  I am accidentally possessed of a power over one of the keepers
here, and in virtue of it I stand before you.  I come from her--
your wife, dear Darnay."

The prisoner wrung his hand.

"I bring you a request from her."

"What is it?"

"A most earnest, pressing, and emphatic entreaty, addressed to you in
the most pathetic tones of the voice so dear to you, that you well remember."

The prisoner turned his face partly aside.

"You have no time to ask me why I bring it, or what it means; I have
no time to tell you.  You must comply with it--take off those boots
you wear, and draw on these of mine."

There was a chair against the wall of the cell, behind the
prisoner. Carton, pressing forward, had already, with the speed of
lightning, got him down into it, and stood over him, barefoot.

"Draw on these boots of mine.  Put your hands to them;
put your will to them.  Quick!"

"Carton, there is no escaping from this place; it never can be done.
You will only die with me.  It is madness."

"It would be madness if I asked you to escape; but do I?  When I ask
you to pass out at that door, tell me it is madness and remain here.
Change that cravat for this of mine, that coat for this of mine.
While you do it, let me take this ribbon from your hair, and shake
out your hair like this of mine!"

With wonderful quickness, and with a strength both of will and action,
that appeared quite supernatural, he forced all these changes upon him.
The prisoner was like a young child in his hands.

"Carton!  Dear Carton!  It is madness.  It cannot be accomplished,
it never can be done, it has been attempted, and has always failed.
I implore you not to add your death to the bitterness of mine."

"Do I ask you, my dear Darnay, to pass the door?  When I ask that,
refuse.  There are pen and ink and paper on this table.  Is your hand
steady enough to write?"

"It was when you came in."

"Steady it again, and write what I shall dictate.  Quick, friend, quick!"

Pressing his hand to his bewildered head, Darnay sat down at the table.
Carton, with his right hand in his breast, stood close beside him.

"Write exactly as I speak."

"To whom do I address it?"

"To no one."  Carton still had his hand in his breast.

"Do I date it?"

"No."

The prisoner looked up, at each question.  Carton, standing over him
with his hand in his breast, looked down.

"`If you remember,'" said Carton, dictating, "`the words that passed
between us, long ago, you will readily comprehend this when you see it.
You do remember them, I know.  It is not in your nature to forget them.'"

He was drawing his hand from his breast; the prisoner chancing to
look up in his hurried wonder as he wrote, the hand stopped, closing
upon something.

"Have you written `forget them'?" Carton asked.

"I have.  Is that a weapon in your hand?"

"No; I am not armed."

"What is it in your hand?"

"You shall know directly.  Write on; there are but a few words more."
He dictated again.  "`I am thankful that the time has come, when I
can prove them.  That I do so is no subject for regret or grief.'"
As he said these words with his eyes fixed on the writer, his hand
slowly and softly moved down close to the writer's face.

The pen dropped from Darnay's fingers on the table, and he looked
about him vacantly.

"What vapour is that?" he asked.

"Vapour?"

"Something that crossed me?"

"I am conscious of nothing; there can be nothing here.  Take up the
pen and finish.  Hurry, hurry!"

As if his memory were impaired, or his faculties disordered, the
prisoner made an effort to rally his attention.  As he looked at
Carton with clouded eyes and with an altered manner of breathing,
Carton--his hand again in his breast--looked steadily at him.

"Hurry, hurry!"

The prisoner bent over the paper, once more.

"`If it had been otherwise;'" Carton's hand was again watchfully
and softly stealing down; "`I never should have used the longer
opportunity. If it had been otherwise;'" the hand was at the
prisoner's face; "`I should but have had so much the more to answer
for.  If it had been otherwise--'" Carton looked at the pen and saw
it was trailing off into unintelligible signs.

Carton's hand moved back to his breast no more.  The prisoner sprang
up with a reproachful look, but Carton's hand was close and firm at
his nostrils, and Carton's left arm caught him round the waist.
For a few seconds he faintly struggled with the man who had come
to lay down his life for him; but, within a minute or so, he was
stretched insensible on the ground.

Quickly, but with hands as true to the purpose as his heart was,
Carton dressed himself in the clothes the prisoner bad laid aside,
combed back his hair, and tied it with the ribbon the prisoner had
worn.  Then, he softly called, "Enter there!  Come in!" and the Spy
presented himself.

"You see?" said Carton, looking up, as he kneeled on one knee beside
the insensible figure, putting the paper in the breast:  "is your
hazard very great?"

"Mr. Carton," the Spy answered, with a timid snap of his fingers,
"my hazard is not THAT, in the thick of business here, if you are
true to the whole of your bargain."

"Don't fear me.  I will be true to the death."

"You must be, Mr. Carton, if the tale of fifty-two is to be right.
Being made right by you in that dress, I shall have no fear."

"Have no fear!  I shall soon be out of the way of harming you, and the
rest will soon be far from here, please God!  Now, get assistance and
take me to the coach."

"You?" said the Spy nervously.

"Him, man, with whom I have exchanged.  You go out at the gate by
which you brought me in?"

"Of course."

"I was weak and faint when you brought me in, and I am fainter now
you take me out.  The parting interview has overpowered me.  Such a
thing has happened here, often, and too often.  Your life is in your
own hands. Quick!  Call assistance!"

"You swear not to betray me?" said the trembling Spy, as he paused
for a last moment.

"Man, man!" returned Carton, stamping his foot; "have I sworn by no
solemn vow already, to go through with this, that you waste the
precious moments now?  Take him yourself to the courtyard you know of,
place him yourself in the carriage, show him yourself to Mr. Lorry,
tell him yourself to give him no restorative but air, and to remember
my words of last night, and his promise of last night, and drive away!"

The Spy withdrew, and Carton seated himself at the table, resting his
forehead on his hands.  The Spy returned immediately, with two men.

"How, then?" said one of them, contemplating the fallen figure.  "So
afflicted to find that his friend has drawn a prize in the lottery of
Sainte Guillotine?"

"A good patriot," said the other, "could hardly have been more
afflicted if the Aristocrat had drawn a blank."

They raised the unconscious figure, placed it on a litter they had
brought to the door, and bent to carry it away.

"The time is short, Evremonde," said the Spy, in a warning voice.

"I know it well," answered Carton.  "Be careful of my friend, I
entreat you, and leave me."

"Come, then, my children," said Barsad.  "Lift him, and come away!"

The door closed, and Carton was left alone.  Straining his powers of
listening to the utmost, he listened for any sound that might denote
suspicion or alarm.  There was none.  Keys turned, doors clashed,
footsteps passed along distant passages:  no cry was raised, or hurry
made, that seemed unusual.  Breathing more freely in a little while,
he sat down at the table, and listened again until the clock struck Two.

Sounds that he was not afraid of, for he divined their meaning, then
began to be audible.  Several doors were opened in succession, and
finally his own.  A gaoler, with a list in his hand, looked in,
merely saying, "Follow me, Evremonde!" and he followed into a large
dark room, at a distance.  It was a dark winter day, and what with
the shadows within, and what with the shadows without, he could but
dimly discern the others who were brought there to have their arms
bound.  Some were standing; some seated.  Some were lamenting, and in
restless motion; but, these were few. The great majority were silent
and still, looking fixedly at the ground.

As he stood by the wall in a dim corner, while some of the fifty-two
were brought in after him, one man stopped in passing, to embrace
him, as having a knowledge of him.  It thrilled him with a great
dread of discovery; but the man went on.  A very few moments after
that, a young woman, with a slight girlish form, a sweet spare face
in which there was no vestige of colour, and large widely opened
patient eyes, rose from the seat where he had observed her sitting,
and came to speak to him.

"Citizen Evremonde," she said, touching him with her cold hand.
"I am a poor little seamstress, who was with you in La Force."

He murmured for answer:  "True.  I forget what you were accused of?"

"Plots.  Though the just Heaven knows that I am innocent of any.
Is it likely?  Who would think of plotting with a poor little weak
creature like me?"

The forlorn smile with which she said it, so touched him, that tears
started from his eyes.

"I am not afraid to die, Citizen Evremonde, but I have done nothing.
I am not unwilling to die, if the Republic which is to do so much
good to us poor, will profit by my death; but I do not know how that
can be, Citizen Evremonde.  Such a poor weak little creature!"

As the last thing on earth that his heart was to warm and soften to,
it warmed and softened to this pitiable girl.

"I heard you were released, Citizen Evremonde.  I hoped it was true?"

"It was.  But, I was again taken and condemned."

"If I may ride with you, Citizen Evremonde, will you let me hold your
hand?  I am not afraid, but I am little and weak, and it will give me
more courage."

As the patient eyes were lifted to his face, he saw a sudden doubt in
them, and then astonishment.  He pressed the work-worn, hunger-worn
young fingers, and touched his lips.

"Are you dying for him?" she whispered.

"And his wife and child.  Hush!  Yes."

"O you will let me hold your brave hand, stranger?"

"Hush!  Yes, my poor sister; to the last."


The same shadows that are falling on the prison, are falling, in that
same hour of the early afternoon, on the Barrier with the crowd about it,
when a coach going out of Paris drives up to be examined.

"Who goes here?  Whom have we within?  Papers!"

The papers are handed out, and read.

"Alexandre Manette.  Physician.  French. Which is he?"

This is he; this helpless, inarticulately murmuring, wandering old
man pointed out.

"Apparently the Citizen-Doctor is not in his right mind?
The Revolution-fever will have been too much for him?"

Greatly too much for him.

"Hah!  Many suffer with it.  Lucie.  His daughter.  French.  Which is she?"

This is she.

"Apparently it must be.  Lucie, the wife of Evremonde; is it not?"

It is.

"Hah!  Evremonde has an assignation elsewhere.  Lucie, her child.
English.  This is she?"

She and no other.

"Kiss me, child of Evremonde.  Now, thou hast kissed a good
Republican; something new in thy family; remember it!  Sydney Carton.
Advocate.  English. Which is he?"

He lies here, in this corner of the carriage.  He, too, is pointed out.

"Apparently the English advocate is in a swoon?"

It is hoped he will recover in the fresher air. It is represented
that he is not in strong health, and has separated sadly from a
friend who is under the displeasure of the Republic.

"Is that all?  It is not a great deal, that!  Many are under the
displeasure of the Republic, and must look out at the little window.
Jarvis Lorry. Banker.  English.  Which is he?"

"I am he.  Necessarily, being the last."

It is Jarvis Lorry who has replied to all the previous questions.
It is Jarvis Lorry who has alighted and stands with his hand on the
coach door, replying to a group of officials.  They leisurely walk
round the carriage and leisurely mount the box, to look at what
little luggage it carries on the roof; the country-people hanging
about, press nearer to the coach doors and greedily stare in; a
little child, carried by its mother, has its short arm held out for
it, that it may touch the wife of an aristocrat who has gone to the
Guillotine.

"Behold your papers, Jarvis Lorry, countersigned."

"One can depart, citizen?"

"One can depart.  Forward, my postilions!  A good journey!"

"I salute you, citizens.--And the first danger passed!"

These are again the words of Jarvis Lorry, as he clasps his hands,
and looks upward.  There is terror in the carriage, there is weeping,
there is the heavy breathing of the insensible traveller.

"Are we not going too slowly?  Can they not be induced to go faster?"
asks Lucie, clinging to the old man.

"It would seem like flight, my darling.  I must not urge them too much;
it would rouse suspicion."

"Look back, look back, and see if we are pursued!"

"The road is clear, my dearest.  So far, we are not pursued."

Houses in twos and threes pass by us, solitary farms, ruinous
buildings, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, open country, avenues
of leafless trees.  The hard uneven pavement is under us, the soft
deep mud is on either side.  Sometimes, we strike into the skirting
mud, to avoid the stones that clatter us and shake us; sometimes, we
stick in ruts and sloughs there.  The agony of our impatience is then
so great, that in our wild alarm and hurry we are for getting out and
running--hiding--doing anything but stopping.

Out of the open country, in again among ruinous buildings, solitary
farms, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, cottages in twos and
threes, avenues of leafless trees.  Have these men deceived us, and
taken us back by another road?  Is not this the same place twice over?
Thank Heaven, no. A village.  Look back, look back, and see if we are
pursued!  Hush! the posting-house.

Leisurely, our four horses are taken out; leisurely, the coach stands
in the little street, bereft of horses, and with no likelihood upon
it of ever moving again; leisurely, the new horses come into visible
existence, one by one; leisurely, the new postilions follow, sucking
and plaiting the lashes of their whips; leisurely, the old postilions
count their money, make wrong additions, and arrive at dissatisfied
results.  All the time, our overfraught hearts are beating at a rate
that would far outstrip the fastest gallop of the fastest horses ever
foaled.

At length the new postilions are in their saddles, and the old are
left behind.  We are through the village, up the hill, and down the
hill, and on the low watery grounds.  Suddenly, the postilions
exchange speech with animated gesticulation, and the horses are
pulled up, almost on their haunches.  We are pursued?

"Ho!  Within the carriage there.  Speak then!"

"What is it?" asks Mr. Lorry, looking out at window.

"How many did they say?"

"I do not understand you."

"--At the last post.  How many to the Guillotine to-day?"

"Fifty-two."

"I said so!  A brave number!  My fellow-citizen here would have it
forty-two; ten more heads are worth having.  The Guillotine goes
handsomely.  I love it.  Hi forward.  Whoop!"

The night comes on dark.  He moves more; he is beginning to revive,
and to speak intelligibly; he thinks they are still together; he asks
him, by his name, what he has in his hand. O pity us, kind Heaven,
and help us!  Look out, look out, and see if we are pursued.

The wind is rushing after us, and the clouds are flying after us, and
the moon is plunging after us, and the whole wild night is in pursuit
of us; but, so far, we are pursued by nothing else.



XIV

The Knitting Done


In that same juncture of time when the Fifty-Two awaited their fate
Madame Defarge held darkly ominous council with The Vengeance and
Jacques Three of the Revolutionary Jury.  Not in the wine-shop did
Madame Defarge confer with these ministers, but in the shed of the
wood-sawyer, erst a mender of roads.  The sawyer himself did not
participate in the conference, but abided at a little distance,
like an outer satellite who was not to speak until required, or to
offer an opinion until invited.

"But our Defarge," said Jacques Three, "is undoubtedly a good
Republican?  Eh?"

"There is no better," the voluble Vengeance protested in her shrill
notes, "in France."

"Peace, little Vengeance," said Madame Defarge, laying her hand with
a slight frown on her lieutenant's lips, "hear me speak.  My husband,
fellow-citizen, is a good Republican and a bold man; he has deserved
well of the Republic, and possesses its confidence.  But my husband
has his weaknesses, and he is so weak as to relent towards this Doctor."

"It is a great pity," croaked Jacques Three, dubiously shaking his
head, with his cruel fingers at his hungry mouth; "it is not quite
like a good citizen; it is a thing to regret."

"See you," said madame, "I care nothing for this Doctor, I.  He may
wear his head or lose it, for any interest I have in him; it is all
one to me. But, the Evremonde people are to be exterminated, and the
wife and child must follow the husband and father."

"She has a fine head for it," croaked Jacques Three.  "I have seen
blue eyes and golden hair there, and they looked charming when Samson
held them up."  Ogre that he was, he spoke like an epicure.

Madame Defarge cast down her eyes, and reflected a little.

"The child also," observed Jacques Three, with a meditative enjoyment
of his words, "has golden hair and blue eyes.  And we seldom have a
child there.  It is a pretty sight!"

"In a word," said Madame Defarge, coming out of her short abstraction,
"I cannot trust my husband in this matter.  Not only do I feel, since
last night, that I dare not confide to him the details of my projects;
but also I feel that if I delay, there is danger of his giving warning,
and then they might escape."

"That must never be," croaked Jacques Three; "no one must escape.
We have not half enough as it is.  We ought to have six score a day."

"In a word," Madame Defarge went on, "my husband has not my reason
for pursuing this family to annihilation, and I have not his reason
for regarding this Doctor with any sensibility.  I must act for myself,
therefore.  Come hither, little citizen."

The wood-sawyer, who held her in the respect, and himself in the
submission, of mortal fear, advanced with his hand to his red cap.

"Touching those signals, little citizen," said Madame Defarge,
sternly, "that she made to the prisoners; you are ready to bear
witness to them this very day?"

"Ay, ay, why not!" cried the sawyer.  "Every day, in all weathers,
from two to four, always signalling, sometimes with the little one,
sometimes without.  I know what I know.  I have seen with my eyes."

He made all manner of gestures while he spoke, as if in incidental
imitation of some few of the great diversity of signals that he had
never seen.

"Clearly plots," said Jacques Three.  "Transparently!"

"There is no doubt of the Jury?" inquired Madame Defarge, letting her
eyes turn to him with a gloomy smile.

"Rely upon the patriotic Jury, dear citizeness.  I answer for my
fellow-Jurymen."

"Now, let me see," said Madame Defarge, pondering again.  "Yet once more!
Can I spare this Doctor to my husband?  I have no feeling either way.
Can I spare him?"

"He would count as one head," observed Jacques Three, in a low voice.
"We really have not heads enough; it would be a pity, I think."

"He was signalling with her when I saw her," argued Madame Defarge;
"I cannot speak of one without the other; and I must not be silent,
and trust the case wholly to him, this little citizen here.
For, I am not a bad witness."

The Vengeance and Jacques Three vied with each other in their fervent
protestations that she was the most admirable and marvellous of
witnesses.  The little citizen, not to be outdone, declared her to be
a celestial witness.

"He must take his chance," said Madame Defarge.  "No, I cannot spare
him!  You are engaged at three o'clock; you are going to see the batch
of to-day executed.--You?"

The question was addressed to the wood-sawyer, who hurriedly replied
in the affirmative:  seizing the occasion to add that he was the most
ardent of Republicans, and that he would be in effect the most
desolate of Republicans, if anything prevented him from enjoying the
pleasure of smoking his afternoon pipe in the contemplation of the
droll national barber.  He was so very demonstrative herein, that he
might have been suspected (perhaps was, by the dark eyes that looked
contemptuously at him out of Madame Defarge's head) of having his small
individual fears for his own personal safety, every hour in the day.

"I," said madame, "am equally engaged at the same place.  After it is
over-say at eight to-night--come you to me, in Saint Antoine, and we
will give information against these people at my Section."

The wood-sawyer said he would be proud and flattered to attend the
citizeness.  The citizeness looking at him, he became embarrassed,
evaded her glance as a small dog would have done, retreated among
his wood, and hid his confusion over the handle of his saw.

Madame Defarge beckoned the Juryman and The Vengeance a little nearer
to the door, and there expounded her further views to them thus:

"She will now be at home, awaiting the moment of his death.  She will
be mourning and grieving.  She will be in a state of mind to impeach
the justice of the Republic.  She will be full of sympathy with its
enemies.  I will go to her."

"What an admirable woman; what an adorable woman!" exclaimed
Jacques Three, rapturously.  "Ah, my cherished!" cried The Vengeance;
and embraced her.

"Take you my knitting," said Madame Defarge, placing it in her
lieutenant's hands, "and have it ready for me in my usual seat.
Keep me my usual chair.  Go you there, straight, for there will
probably be a greater concourse than usual, to-day."

"I willingly obey the orders of my Chief," said The Vengeance with
alacrity, and kissing her cheek.  "You will not be late?"

"I shall be there before the commencement."

"And before the tumbrils arrive.  Be sure you are there, my soul,"
said The Vengeance, calling after her, for she had already turned
into the street, "before the tumbrils arrive!"

Madame Defarge slightly waved her hand, to imply that she heard, and
might be relied upon to arrive in good time, and so went through the
mud, and round the corner of the prison wall.  The Vengeance and the
Juryman, looking after her as she walked away, were highly appreciative
of her fine figure, and her superb moral endowments.

There were many women at that time, upon whom the time laid a
dreadfully disfiguring hand; but, there was not one among them more
to be dreaded than this ruthless woman, now taking her way along the
streets.  Of a strong and fearless character, of shrewd sense and
readiness, of great determination, of that kind of beauty which not
only seems to impart to its possessor firmness and animosity, but to
strike into others an instinctive recognition of those qualities; the
troubled time would have heaved her up, under any circumstances.
But, imbued from her childhood with a brooding sense of wrong, and an
inveterate hatred of a class, opportunity had developed her into a
tigress.  She was absolutely without pity.  If she had ever had the
virtue in her, it had quite gone out of her.

It was nothing to her, that an innocent man was to die for the sins
of his forefathers; she saw, not him, but them.  It was nothing to her,
that his wife was to be made a widow and his daughter an orphan; that
was insufficient punishment, because they were her natural enemies
and her prey, and as such had no right to live.  To appeal to her,
was made hopeless by her having no sense of pity, even for herself.
If she had been laid low in the streets, in any of the many encounters
in which she had been engaged, she would not have pitied herself;
nor, if she had been ordered to the axe to-morrow, would she have
gone to it with any softer feeling than a fierce desire to change
places with the man who sent here there.

Such a heart Madame Defarge carried under her rough robe.  Carelessly
worn, it was a becoming robe enough, in a certain weird way, and her
dark hair looked rich under her coarse red cap.  Lying hidden in her
bosom, was a loaded pistol.  Lying hidden at her waist, was a sharpened
dagger.  Thus accoutred, and walking with the confident tread of such
a character, and with the supple freedom of a woman who had habitually
walked in her girlhood, bare-foot and bare-legged, on the brown
sea-sand, Madame Defarge took her way along the streets.

Now, when the journey of the travelling coach, at that very moment
waiting for the completion of its load, had been planned out last
night, the difficulty of taking Miss Pross in it had much engaged
Mr. Lorry's attention.  It was not merely desirable to avoid
overloading the coach, but it was of the highest importance that the
time occupied in examining it and its passengers, should be reduced
to the utmost; since their escape might depend on the saving of only
a few seconds here and there.  Finally, he had proposed, after anxious

consideration, that Miss Pross and Jerry, who were at liberty to
leave the city, should leave it at three o'clock in the lightest-
wheeled conveyance known to that period.  Unencumbered with luggage,
they would soon overtake the coach, and, passing it and preceding it
on the road, would order its horses in advance, and greatly facilitate
its progress during the precious hours of the night, when delay was
the most to be dreaded.

Seeing in this arrangement the hope of rendering real service in that
pressing emergency, Miss Pross hailed it with joy.  She and Jerry had
beheld the coach start, had known who it was that Solomon brought,
had passed some ten minutes in tortures of suspense, and were now
concluding their arrangements to follow the coach, even as Madame
Defarge, taking her way through the streets, now drew nearer and
nearer to the else-deserted lodging in which they held their consultation.

"Now what do you think, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whose
agitation was so great that she could hardly speak, or stand,
or move, or live:  "what do you think of our not starting from this
courtyard?  Another carriage having already gone from here to-day,
it might awaken suspicion."

"My opinion, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher, "is as you're right.
Likewise wot I'll stand by you, right or wrong."

"I am so distracted with fear and hope for our precious creatures,"
said Miss Pross, wildly crying, "that I am incapable of forming any
plan. Are YOU capable of forming any plan, my dear good Mr. Cruncher?"

"Respectin' a future spear o' life, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher,
"I hope so.  Respectin' any present use o' this here blessed old head
o' mind, I think not.  Would you do me the favour, miss, to take
notice o' two promises and wows wot it is my wishes fur to record in
this here crisis?"

"Oh, for gracious sake!" cried Miss Pross, still wildly crying,
"record them at once, and get them out of the way, like an excellent man."

"First," said Mr. Cruncher, who was all in a tremble, and who spoke
with an ashy and solemn visage, "them poor things well out o' this,
never no more will I do it, never no more!"

"I am quite sure, Mr. Cruncher," returned Miss Pross, "that you never
will do it again, whatever it is, and I beg you not to think it
necessary to mention more particularly what it is."

"No, miss," returned Jerry, "it shall not be named to you.  Second:
them poor things well out o' this, and never no more will I interfere
with Mrs. Cruncher's flopping, never no more!"

"Whatever housekeeping arrangement that may be," said Miss Pross,
striving to dry her eyes and compose herself, "I have no doubt it
is best that Mrs. Cruncher should have it entirely under her own
superintendence.--O my poor darlings!"

"I go so far as to say, miss, moreover," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with
a most alarming tendency to hold forth as from a pulpit--"and let my
words be took down and took to Mrs. Cruncher through yourself--that
wot my opinions respectin' flopping has undergone a change, and that
wot I only hope with all my heart as Mrs. Cruncher may be a flopping
at the present time."

"There, there, there!  I hope she is, my dear man," cried the distracted
Miss Pross, "and I hope she finds it answering her expectations."

"Forbid it," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with additional solemnity,
additional slowness, and additional tendency to hold forth and hold
out, "as anything wot I have ever said or done should be wisited on
my earnest wishes for them poor creeturs now!  Forbid it as we shouldn't
all flop (if it was anyways conwenient) to get 'em out o' this here
dismal risk!  Forbid it, miss!  Wot I say, for-BID it!"  This was
Mr. Cruncher's conclusion after a protracted but vain endeavour
to find a better one.

And still Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came
nearer and nearer.

"If we ever get back to our native land," said Miss Pross, "you may
rely upon my telling Mrs. Cruncher as much as I may be able to remember
and understand of what you have so impressively said; and at all
events you may be sure that I shall bear witness to your being
thoroughly in earnest at this dreadful time.  Now, pray let us think!
My esteemed Mr. Cruncher, let us think!"

Still, Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came
nearer and nearer.

"If you were to go before," said Miss Pross, "and stop the vehicle
and horses from coming here, and were to wait somewhere for me;
wouldn't that be best?"

Mr. Cruncher thought it might be best.

"Where could you wait for me?" asked Miss Pross.

Mr. Cruncher was so bewildered that he could think of no locality but
Temple Bar.  Alas!  Temple Bar was hundreds of miles away, and Madame
Defarge was drawing very near indeed.

"By the cathedral door," said Miss Pross.  "Would it be much out of the
way, to take me in, near the great cathedral door between the two towers?"

"No, miss," answered Mr. Cruncher.

"Then, like the best of men," said Miss Pross, "go to the posting-
house straight, and make that change."

"I am doubtful," said Mr. Cruncher, hesitating and shaking his head,
"about leaving of you, you see.  We don't know what may happen."

"Heaven knows we don't," returned Miss Pross, "but have no fear for
me. Take me in at the cathedral, at Three o'Clock, or as near it as
you can, and I am sure it will be better than our going from here.
I feel certain of it.  There!  Bless you, Mr. Cruncher!  Think-not of
me, but of the lives that may depend on both of us!"

This exordium, and Miss Pross's two hands in quite agonised entreaty
clasping his, decided Mr. Cruncher.  With an encouraging nod or two,
he immediately went out to alter the arrangements, and left her by
herself to follow as she had proposed.

The having originated a precaution which was already in course of
execution, was a great relief to Miss Pross.  The necessity of
composing her appearance so that it should attract no special notice
in the streets, was another relief.  She looked at her watch, and it
was twenty minutes past two.  She had no time to lose, but must get
ready at once.

Afraid, in her extreme perturbation, of the loneliness of the
deserted rooms, and of half-imagined faces peeping from behind every
open door in them, Miss Pross got a basin of cold water and began
laving her eyes, which were swollen and red.  Haunted by her feverish
apprehensions, she could not bear to have her sight obscured for a
minute at a time by the dripping water, but constantly paused and
looked round to see that there was no one watching her.  In one of
those pauses she recoiled and cried out, for she saw a figure
standing in the room.

The basin fell to the ground broken, and the water flowed to the feet
of Madame Defarge.  By strange stem ways, and through much staining
blood, those feet had come to meet that water.

Madame Defarge looked coldly at her, and said, "The wife of Evremonde;
where is she?"

It flashed upon Miss Pross's mind that the doors were all standing
open, and would suggest the flight.  Her first act was to shut them.
There were four in the room, and she shut them all.  She then placed
herself before the door of the chamber which Lucie had occupied.

Madame Defarge's dark eyes followed her through this rapid movement,
and rested on her when it was finished.  Miss Pross had nothing
beautiful about her; years had not tamed the wildness, or softened
the grimness, of her appearance; but, she too was a determined woman
in her different way, and she measured Madame Defarge with her eyes,
every inch.

"You might, from your appearance, be the wife of Lucifer," said Miss
Pross, in her breathing.  "Nevertheless, you shall not get the better
of me. I am an Englishwoman."

Madame Defarge looked at her scornfully, but still with something of
Miss Pross's own perception that they two were at bay.  She saw a
tight, hard, wiry woman before her, as Mr. Lorry had seen in the same
figure a woman with a strong hand, in the years gone by.  She knew
full well that Miss Pross was the family's devoted friend; Miss Pross
knew full well that Madame Defarge was the family's malevolent enemy.

"On my way yonder," said Madame Defarge, with a slight movement of
her hand towards the fatal spot, "where they reserve my chair and my
knitting for me, I am come to make my compliments to her in passing.
I wish to see her."

"I know that your intentions are evil," said Miss Pross, "and you may
depend upon it, I'll hold my own against them."

Each spoke in her own language; neither understood the other's words;
both were very watchful, and intent to deduce from look and manner,
what the unintelligible words meant.

"It will do her no good to keep herself concealed from me at this
moment," said Madame Defarge.  "Good patriots will know what that means.
Let me see her.  Go tell her that I wish to see her.  Do you hear?"

"If those eyes of yours were bed-winches," returned Miss Pross, "and
I was an English four-poster, they shouldn't loose a splinter of me.
No, you wicked foreign woman; I am your match."

Madame Defarge was not likely to follow these idiomatic remarks in
detail; but, she so far understood them as to perceive that she was
set at naught.

"Woman imbecile and pig-like!" said Madame Defarge, frowning.
"I take no answer from you.  I demand to see her.  Either tell her
that I demand to see her, or stand out of the way of the door and let
me go to her!"  This, with an angry explanatory wave of her right arm.

"I little thought," said Miss Pross, "that I should ever want to
understand your nonsensical language; but I would give all I have,
except the clothes I wear, to know whether you suspect the truth, or
any part of it."

Neither of them for a single moment released the other's eyes.
Madame Defarge had not moved from the spot where she stood when Miss
Pross first became aware of her; but, she now advanced one step.

"I am a Briton," said Miss Pross, "I am desperate.  I don't care an
English Twopence for myself.  I know that the longer I keep you here,
the greater hope there is for my Ladybird.  I'll not leave a handful
of that dark hair upon your head, if you lay a finger on me!"

Thus Miss Pross, with a shake of her head and a flash of her eyes
between every rapid sentence, and every rapid sentence a whole breath.
Thus Miss Pross, who had never struck a blow in her life.

But, her courage was of that emotional nature that it brought the
irrepressible tears into her eyes.  This was a courage that Madame
Defarge so little comprehended as to mistake for weakness.  "Ha, ha!"
she laughed, "you poor wretch!  What are you worth!  I address myself
to that Doctor."  Then she raised her voice and called out, "Citizen
Doctor!  Wife of Evremonde!  Child of Evremonde!  Any person but this
miserable fool, answer the Citizeness Defarge!"

Perhaps the following silence, perhaps some latent disclosure in the
expression of Miss Pross's face, perhaps a sudden misgiving apart from
either suggestion, whispered to Madame Defarge that they were gone.
Three of the doors she opened swiftly, and looked in.

"Those rooms are all in disorder, there has been hurried packing,
there are odds and ends upon the ground.  There is no one in that
room behind you!  Let me look."

"Never!" said Miss Pross, who understood the request as perfectly as
Madame Defarge understood the answer.

"If they are not in that room, they are gone, and can be pursued and
brought back," said Madame Defarge to herself.

"As long as you don't know whether they are in that room or not, you
are uncertain what to do," said Miss Pross to herself; "and you shall
not know that, if I can prevent your knowing it; and know that, or
not know that, you shall not leave here while I can hold you."

"I have been in the streets from the first, nothing has stopped me,
I will tear you to pieces, but I will have you from that door," said
Madame Defarge.

"We are alone at the top of a high house in a solitary courtyard,
we are not likely to be heard, and I pray for bodily strength to keep
you here, while every minute you are here is worth a hundred thousand
guineas to my darling," said Miss Pross.

Madame Defarge made at the door.  Miss Pross, on the instinct of the
moment, seized her round the waist in both her arms, and held her
tight. It was in vain for Madame Defarge to struggle and to strike;
Miss Pross, with the vigorous tenacity of love, always so much
stronger than hate, clasped her tight, and even lifted her from the
floor in the struggle that they had.  The two hands of Madame Defarge
buffeted and tore her face; but, Miss Pross, with her head down, held
her round the waist, and clung to her with more than the hold of a
drowning woman.

Soon, Madame Defarge's hands ceased to strike, and felt at her
encircled waist.  "It is under my arm," said Miss Pross, in smothered
tones, "you shall not draw it.  I am stronger than you, I bless
Heaven for it.  I hold you till one or other of us faints or dies!"

Madame Defarge's hands were at her bosom.  Miss Pross looked up, saw
what it was, struck at it, struck out a flash and a crash, and stood
alone--blinded with smoke.

All this was in a second.  As the smoke cleared, leaving an awful
stillness, it passed out on the air, like the soul of the furious
woman whose body lay lifeless on the ground.

In the first fright and horror of her situation, Miss Pross passed
the body as far from it as she could, and ran down the stairs to call
for fruitless help.  Happily, she bethought herself of the
consequences of what she did, in time to check herself and go back.
It was dreadful to go in at the door again; but, she did go in, and
even went near it, to get the bonnet and other things that she must
wear.  These she put on, out on the staircase, first shutting and
locking the door and taking away the key.  She then sat down on the
stairs a few moments to breathe and to cry, and then got up and
hurried away.

By good fortune she had a veil on her bonnet, or she could hardly
have gone along the streets without being stopped.  By good fortune,
too, she was naturally so peculiar in appearance as not to show
disfigurement like any other woman.  She needed both advantages, for
the marks of griping fingers were deep in her face, and her hair was
torn, and her dress (hastily composed with unsteady hands) was
clutched and dragged a hundred ways.

In crossing the bridge, she dropped the door key in the river.
Arriving at the cathedral some few minutes before her escort, and
waiting there, she thought, what if the key were already taken in a
net, what if it were identified, what if the door were opened and the
remains discovered, what if she were stopped at the gate, sent to
prison, and charged with murder!  In the midst of these fluttering
thoughts, the escort appeared, took her in, and took her away.

"Is there any noise in the streets?" she asked him.

"The usual noises," Mr. Cruncher replied; and looked surprised by the
question and by her aspect.

"I don't hear you," said Miss Pross.  "What do you say?"

It was in vain for Mr. Cruncher to repeat what he said; Miss Pross
could not hear him.  "So I'll nod my head," thought Mr. Cruncher,
amazed, "at all events she'll see that."  And she did.

"Is there any noise in the streets now?" asked Miss Pross again,
presently.

Again Mr. Cruncher nodded his head.

"I don't hear it."

"Gone deaf in an hour?" said Mr. Cruncher, ruminating, with his mind
much disturbed; "wot's come to her?"

"I feel," said Miss Pross, "as if there had been a flash and a crash,
and that crash was the last thing I should ever hear in this life."

"Blest if she ain't in a queer condition!" said Mr. Cruncher, more
and more disturbed.  "Wot can she have been a takin', to keep her
courage up?  Hark!  There's the roll of them dreadful carts!  You can
hear that, miss?"

"I can hear," said Miss Pross, seeing that he spoke to her,
"nothing. O, my good man, there was first a great crash, and then a
great stillness, and that stillness seems to be fixed and
unchangeable, never to be broken any more as long as my life lasts."

"If she don't hear the roll of those dreadful carts, now very nigh
their journey's end," said Mr. Cruncher, glancing over his shoulder,
"it's my opinion that indeed she never will hear anything else in
this world."

And indeed she never did.



XV

The Footsteps Die Out For Ever


Along the Paris streets, the death-carts rumble, hollow and harsh.
Six tumbrils carry the day's wine to La Guillotine.  All the
devouring and insatiate Monsters imagined since imagination could
record itself, are fused in the one realisation, Guillotine.  And yet
there is not in France, with its rich variety of soil and climate,
a blade, a leaf, a root, a sprig, a peppercorn, which will grow to
maturity under conditions more certain than those that have produced
this horror.  Crush humanity out of shape once more, under similar
hammers, and it will twist itself into the same tortured forms.
Sow the same seed of rapacious license and oppression over again,
and it will surely yield the same fruit according to its kind.

Six tumbrils roll along the streets.  Change these back again to what
they were, thou powerful enchanter, Time, and they shall be seen to
be the carriages of absolute monarchs, the equipages of feudal nobles,
the toilettes of flaring Jezebels, the churches that are not my
father's house but dens of thieves, the huts of millions of starving
peasants!  No; the great magician who majestically works out the
appointed order of the Creator, never reverses his transformations.
"If thou be changed into this shape by the will of God," say the
seers to the enchanted, in the wise Arabian stories, "then remain so!
But, if thou wear this form through mere passing conjuration, then resume
thy former aspect!"  Changeless and hopeless, the tumbrils roll along.

As the sombre wheels of the six carts go round, they seem to plough
up a long crooked furrow among the populace in the streets.  Ridges
of faces are thrown to this side and to that, and the ploughs go
steadily onward.  So used are the regular inhabitants of the houses
to the spectacle, that in many windows there are no people,
and in some the occupation of the hands is not so much as suspended,
while the eyes survey the faces in the tumbrils.  Here and there,
the inmate has visitors to see the sight; then he points his finger,
with something of the complacency of a curator or authorised exponent,
to this cart and to this, and seems to tell who sat here yesterday,
and who there the day before.

Of the riders in the tumbrils, some observe these things, and all
things on their last roadside, with an impassive stare; others, with
a lingering interest in the ways of life and men.  Some, seated with
drooping heads, are sunk in silent despair; again, there are some so
heedful of their looks that they cast upon the multitude such glances
as they have seen in theatres, and in pictures.  Several close their
eyes, and think, or try to get their straying thoughts together.
Only one, and he a miserable creature, of a crazed aspect, is so
shattered and made drunk by horror, that he sings, and tries to
dance.  Not one of the whole number appeals by look or gesture, to
the pity of the people.

There is a guard of sundry horsemen riding abreast of the tumbrils,
and faces are often turned up to some of them, and they are asked
some question.  It would seem to be always the same question, for,
it is always followed by a press of people towards the third cart.
The horsemen abreast of that cart, frequently point out one man in it
with their swords. The leading curiosity is, to know which is he;
he stands at the back of the tumbril with his head bent down,
to converse with a mere girl who sits on the side of the cart,
and holds his hand.  He has no curiosity or care for the scene about him,
and always speaks to the girl.  Here and there in the long street
of St. Honore, cries are raised against him.  If they move him at all,
it is only to a quiet smile, as he shakes his hair a little more
loosely about his face.  He cannot easily touch his face, his arms
being bound.

On the steps of a church, awaiting the coming-up of the tumbrils,
stands the Spy and prison-sheep.  He looks into the first of them:
not there.  He looks into the second:  not there.  He already asks
himself, "Has he sacrificed me?" when his face clears, as he looks
into the third.

"Which is Evremonde?" says a man behind him.

"That.  At the back there."

"With his hand in the girl's?"

"Yes."

The man cries, "Down, Evremonde!  To the Guillotine all aristocrats!
Down, Evremonde!"

"Hush, hush!" the Spy entreats him, timidly.

"And why not, citizen?"

"He is going to pay the forfeit:  it will be paid in five minutes more.
Let him be at peace."

But the man continuing to exclaim, "Down, Evremonde!" the face of
Evremonde is for a moment turned towards him.  Evremonde then sees
the Spy, and looks attentively at him, and goes his way.

The clocks are on the stroke of three, and the furrow ploughed among
the populace is turning round, to come on into the place of execution,
and end.  The ridges thrown to this side and to that, now crumble in
and close behind the last plough as it passes on, for all are following
to the Guillotine.  In front of it, seated in chairs, as in a garden
of public diversion, are a number of women, busily knitting.  On one
of the fore-most chairs, stands The Vengeance, looking about for her friend.

"Therese!" she cries, in her shrill tones.  "Who has seen her?
Therese Defarge!"

"She never missed before," says a knitting-woman of the sisterhood.

"No; nor will she miss now," cries The Vengeance, petulantly.  "Therese."

"Louder," the woman recommends.

Ay!  Louder, Vengeance, much louder, and still she will scarcely hear
thee.  Louder yet, Vengeance, with a little oath or so added, and yet
it will hardly bring her.  Send other women up and down to seek her,
lingering somewhere; and yet, although the messengers have done dread
deeds, it is questionable whether of their own wills they will go far
enough to find her!

"Bad Fortune!" cries The Vengeance, stamping her foot in the chair,
"and here are the tumbrils!  And Evremonde will be despatched in a
wink, and she not here!  See her knitting in my hand, and her empty
chair ready for her.  I cry with vexation and disappointment!"

As The Vengeance descends from her elevation to do it, the tumbrils
begin to discharge their loads.  The ministers of Sainte Guillotine
are robed and ready.  Crash!--A head is held up, and the knitting-
women who scarcely lifted their eyes to look at it a moment ago when
it could think and speak, count One.

The second tumbril empties and moves on; the third comes up.  Crash!
--And the knitting-women, never faltering or pausing in their Work,
count Two.

The supposed Evremonde descends, and the seamstress is lifted out
next after him.  He has not relinquished her patient hand in getting
out, but still holds it as he promised.  He gently places her with
her back to the crashing engine that constantly whirrs up and falls,
and she looks into his face and thanks him.

"But for you, dear stranger, I should not be so composed, for I am
naturally a poor little thing, faint of heart; nor should I have been
able to raise my thoughts to Him who was put to death, that we might
have hope and comfort here to-day.  I think you were sent to me by Heaven."

"Or you to me," says Sydney Carton.  "Keep your eyes upon me, dear child,
and mind no other object."

"I mind nothing while I hold your hand.  I shall mind nothing when
I let it go, if they are rapid."

"They will be rapid.  Fear not!"

The two stand in the fast-thinning throng of victims, but they speak
as if they were alone.  Eye to eye, voice to voice, hand to hand,
heart to heart, these two children of the Universal Mother, else so
wide apart and differing, have come together on the dark highway,
to repair home together, and to rest in her bosom.

"Brave and generous friend, will you let me ask you one last
question?  I am very ignorant, and it troubles me--just a little."

"Tell me what it is."

"I have a cousin, an only relative and an orphan, like myself, whom I
love very dearly.  She is five years younger than I, and she lives in
a farmer's house in the south country.  Poverty parted us, and she
knows nothing of my fate--for I cannot write--and if I could, how
should I tell her!  It is better as it is."

"Yes, yes:  better as it is."

"What I have been thinking as we came along, and what I am still
thinking now, as I look into your kind strong face which gives me so
much support, is this:--If the Republic really does good to the poor,
and they come to be less hungry, and in all ways to suffer less, she
may live a long time:  she may even live to be old."

"What then, my gentle sister?"

"Do you think:" the uncomplaining eyes in which there is so much
endurance, fill with tears, and the lips part a little more and
tremble:  "that it will seem long to me, while I wait for her in the
better land where I trust both you and I will be mercifully sheltered?"

"It cannot be, my child; there is no Time there, and no trouble
there."

"You comfort me so much!  I am so ignorant.  Am I to kiss you now?
Is the moment come?"

"Yes."

She kisses his lips; he kisses hers; they solemnly bless each other.
The spare hand does not tremble as he releases it; nothing worse than
a sweet, bright constancy is in the patient face.  She goes next
before him--is gone; the knitting-women count Twenty-Two.

"I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord:
he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:
and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die."

The murmuring of many voices, the upturning of many faces,
the pressing on of many footsteps in the outskirts of the crowd,
so that it swells forward in a mass, like one great heave of water,
all flashes away. Twenty-Three.



They said of him, about the city that night, that it was the
peacefullest man's face ever beheld there.  Many added that he looked
sublime and prophetic.

One of the most remarkable sufferers by the same axe--a woman-had
asked at the foot of the same scaffold, not long before, to be
allowed to write down the thoughts that were inspiring her.  If he
had given any utterance to his, and they were prophetic, they would
have been these:

"I see Barsad, and Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance, the Juryman, the
Judge, long ranks of the new oppressors who have risen on the
destruction of the old, perishing by this retributive instrument,
before it shall cease out of its present use.  I see a beautiful city
and a brilliant people rising from this abyss, and, in their struggles
to be truly free, in their triumphs and defeats, through long years
to come, I see the evil of this time and of the previous time of
which this is the natural birth, gradually making expiation for
itself and wearing out.

"I see the lives for which I lay down my life, peaceful, useful,
prosperous and happy, in that England which I shall see no more.
I see Her with a child upon her bosom, who bears my name.  I see her
father, aged and bent, but otherwise restored, and faithful to all
men in his healing office, and at peace.  I see the good old man, so
long their friend, in ten years' time enriching them with all he has,
and passing tranquilly to his reward.

"I see that I hold a sanctuary in their hearts, and in the hearts of
their descendants, generations hence.  I see her, an old woman,
weeping for me on the anniversary of this day.  I see her and her
husband, their course done, lying side by side in their last earthly
bed, and I know that each was not more honoured and held sacred in
the other's soul, than I was in the souls of both.

"I see that child who lay upon her bosom and who bore my name, a man
winning his way up in that path of life which once was mine.  I see
him winning it so well, that my name is made illustrious there by the
light of his.  I see the blots I threw upon it, faded away.  I see
him, fore-most of just judges and honoured men, bringing a boy of my
name, with a forehead that I know and golden hair, to this place--
then fair to look upon, with not a trace of this day's disfigurement
--and I hear him tell the child my story, with a tender and a faltering voice.

"It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done;
it is a far, far better rest that I go to than I have ever known."


End of A Tale of Two Cities

LITTLE WOMEN by LOUISA MAY ALCOTT

This text was digitized (typed by hand) by

Ted & Florence Daniel
New Wave Publishers
2103 N. Liberty Street
Portland OR 97217-4971
BBS: (503) 286-5577

This text is in the public domain.

                          FORWARD

               LOUISA MAY ALCOTT  1832-1888

     Louisa May Alcott's novel brings to life vividly the life
of New England during the nineteenth century.   A  life  that
was tranquil, secure, and productive.

     It is little wonder,  for she drew on her own and on her
family's experiences for her work.   As one of four daughters
growing up in Boston.

     At the age of eight, she moved with her family to nearby
Concord.  There she spent the happiest  years of  her younger
life, even though she experienced the constant threat of pov-
erty.

     She counted as friends the children of Hawthorne and Em-
erson.  The Alcott was only a modest cottage,  but  the girls
made use of a neighboring barn to  perform  plays written  by
Louisa May.

     She was educated at home, and became a school teacher in
Boston. She saw her first story printed in a Boston newspaper
at the age of twenty.  Her  first  full-length book  appeared
two years later.

     Interrupting her career as a writer,she served as a nurse
in a Washington hospital during the Civil War.

     The thing that pleased her most about her writing, as  she
became more and more well known, was the fact that sales of her
books helped to make life more comfortable and less of a  daily
struggle for her parents in their later years.

     LITTLE WOMEN was published in 1869, and has gone on to be-
come one of America's classics.

     This copy of LITTLE WOMEN has been transposed to disk and
is supplied by  NEW WAVE PUBLISHERS,  2103  N. LIBERTY STREET,
PORTLAND, OR  97217-4971

UPLOADED FROM ELVIRA'S PINNACLE CLUB  286-5577  7 AM  - 10 PM



                             LITTLE WOMEN

                              c 1869 by

                           Louisa May Alcott

                              CHAPTER ONE

     "Christmas won't be Christmas without any presents," grumbled
Jo, lying on the rug.

     "It's so dreadful to be poor!"  sighed Meg,  looking down at
her old dress.

      "I don't think it's fair for some girls to have plenty of
pretty things, and other girls nothing at all,"  added little Amy,
with an injured sniff.

     "We've got Father and Mother, and each other," said Beth
contentedly from her corner.

     The four young faces on which the firelight shone brightened
at the cheerful words, but darkened again as Jo said sadly, "We
haven't got Father, and shall not have him for a long time."  She
didn't say "perhaps never,"  but each silently added it, thinking
of Father far away, where the fighting was.

     Nobody spoke for a minute; then Meg said in an altered tone,
"You know the reason Mother proposed not having any presents this
Christmas was because it is going to be a hard winter for everyone;
and she thinks we ought not to spend money for  pleasure,  when
our  men are suffering so in the army. We can't do much,but we can
make our little sacrifices, and ought to do it gladly.  But I am
afraid I don't"  And Meg shook her head,as she thought regretfully
of all the pretty things she wanted.

     "But I don't think the little we should spend would  do any
good. We've each got a dollar, and the army wouldn't be much helped
by our giving that. I agree not to expect anything from Mother or
you, but I do want to buy UNDINE AND SINTRAM for myself.  I've
wanted it so long," said Jo, who was a bookworm.

     "I planned to spend mine in new music," said Beth,  with a
little sigh, which no one heard but the hearth brush and kettle
holder.

     "I shall get a  nice box  of Faber's drawing  pencils.   I
really  need them," said Amy decidedly.

     "Mother didn't say anything about  our money,  and she won't
wish us to give up everything.   Let's  each buy what we want, and
have a little fun.  I'm sure we work hard enough to earn it," cried
Jo, examining the heels of her shoes in a gentlemanly manner.

     "I know I do--teaching those  tiresome  children nearly  all
day, when I'm longing to enjoy myself at home," began Meg, in the
complaining tone again.

     "You don't have half such a hard time as I do,"  said  Jo.
"How would you like to be shut up for hours with a nervous, fussy
old lady, who keeps you trotting, is never satisfied,  and worries
you till you you're ready to fly out the window or cry?"

     "It's naughty to fret,  but I do think washing dishes and
keeping things tidy is the worst work in the  world.   It makes me
cross, and my hands get so stiff, I can't practice well at all."
And Beth looked at her rough hands with a sigh that any one could
hear that time.

     "I don't believe any of you suffer as I do,"  cried Amy, "for
you don't have to go to school with impertinent girls,  who plague
you if you don't know your lessons, and laugh at your dresses, and
label your father if he isn't rich, and insult you when your nose
isn't nice."

     "If you mean libel, I'd say so, and not talk about labels, as
if Papa was a pickle bottle," advised Jo, laughing.

     "I know what I mean, and you needn't be statirical about it.
It's proper to use good words, and improve your vocabilary,"
returned  Amy, with dignity.

     "Don't peck at one another,  children.  Don't you wish we
had the money Papa lost when we were little, Jo?  Dear me! How
happy and good we'd be, if we had no worries!"  said Meg,  who
could remember better times.

     "You said the other day you thought we  were a deal happier
than the King children,  for they were fighting and fretting all
the time, in spite of their money."

     "So I did, Beth.  Well, I think we are.  For though we do
have to work,  we make fun of ourselves,  and are a pretty  jolly
set,  as Jo would say."

     "Jo does use such slang words!"   observed Amy,  with a
reproving look at the long figure stretched on the rug.

     Jo immediately sat up, put her hands in her pockets, and
began to whistle.

     "Don't, Jo.  It's so boyish!"

     "That's why I do it."

     "I detest rude, unladylike girls!"

     "I hate affected, niminy-piminy chits!"

     "Birds in their little nests agree,"  sang Beth,  the
peacemaker, with such a funny face that both sharp voices
softened to  a  laugh, and the "pecking" ended for that time.

     "Really, girls, you are both to be blamed,"  said Meg,
beginning to lecture in her elder-sisterly fashion."You are old
enough to leave off boyish tricks, and to behave better,
Josephine.  It didn't matter so much when you were a little
girl, but now you are so tall,and turn up your hair, you should
remember that you are a young lady."

     "I'm not!   And if turning up my hair makes me one,  I'll
wear it in two tails till I'm twenty,"  cried  Jo,  pulling off
her net,  and shaking down a chestnut mane.   "I hate  to think
I've got to grow up,  and be Miss March, and wear long gowns,
and look as prim as a  China Aster!  It's bad enough to be a
girl, anyway, when I like boy's games and work and manners!  I
can't get over my disappointment in not being a boy.  And it's
worse than ever now,  for I'm dying  to go and fight with Papa.
And I can only stay home and knit, like a poky old woman!"

     And Jo shook the blue army sock till the needles rattled
like castanets, and her ball bounded across the room.

     "Poor Jo!  It's too bad, but it can't be helped.  So you
must try to be contented with making your name boyish, and
playing brother to us girls," said Beth, stroking the rough
head with a hand that all the dish washing and dusting in the
world could not make ungentle in its touch.

     "As for you, Amy," continued Meg, "you are altogether
to particular and prim.  Your airs are funny now, but you'll
grow up an affected little goose, if you don't take care.  I
I like your nice manners and refined ways of speaking, when
you don't try to be elegant. But your absurd words are as bad
as Jo's slang."

     "If Jo is a tomboy and Amy a goose, what am I, please?"
asked Beth, ready to share the lecture.

     "You're a dear, and nothing else," answered Meg warmly,
and no one contradicted her, for the `Mouse' was the pet of the
family.

     As young readers like to know `how people look', we will
take this moment to give them a little sketch of the four
sisters, who sat knitting away in the twilight, while the
December snow fell quietly without, and the fire crackled
cheerfully within.  It was a comfortable room,though the carpet
was faded and the furniture very plain, for a good picture or
two hung on the walls, books filled the recesses, chrysanthemums
and Christmas roses bloomed in the windows, and a pleasant atmos-
phere of home peace pervaded it.

     Margaret, the eldest of the four, was sixteen, and very pretty,
being plump and fair, with large eyes, plenty of soft brown hair, a
sweet mouth, and white hands,of which she was rather vain.  Fifteen-
year-old Jo was very tall, thin, and brown, and reminded one of a
colt, for she never seemed to know what to do with her long limbs,
which were very much in her way.  She had a decided mouth, a comical
nose, and sharp, gray eyes, which appeared to see everything, and
were by turns fierce,funny, or thoughtful.  Her long, thick hair
was her one beauty, but it was usually bundled into a net, to be
out of her way.  Round shoulders had Jo, big hands and feet, a fly-
away look to her clothes, and the uncomfortable appearance of a
girl who was rapidly shooting up into a woman and didn't like it.
Elizabeth, or Beth, as everyone called her, was a rosy, smooth-
haired, bright-eyed girl of thirteen, with a shy manner, a timid
voice, and a ;peaceful expression which was seldom disturbed. Her
father called her `Little Miss Tranquility', and the name suited
her excellently, for she seemed to live in a happy world of her
own, only venturing out to meet the few whom she trusted and loved.
Amy, though the youngest, was a most important person, in her own
opinion at least.  A regular snow maiden, with blue eyes, and
yellow hair curling on her shoulders, pale and slender, and always
carrying herself like a young lady mindful of her manners. What
the characters of the four sisters were we will leave to be found
out.

     The clock struck six and, having swept up the hearth, Beth
put a pair of slippers down to warm.  Somehow the sight of the old
shoes had a good effect upon the girls, for Mother was coming, and
everyone brightened to welcome her.  Meg stopped lecturing, and
lighted the lamp, Amy got out of the easy chair without being asked,
and Jo forgot how tired she was as she sat up to hold the slippers
nearer to the blaze.

     "They are quite worn out.  Marmee must have a new pair."

     "I thought I'd get her some with my dollar," said Beth.

     "No, I shall!" cried Amy.

     "I'm the oldest," began Meg, but Jo cut in with a decided,
"I'm the man of the family now Papa is away, and I shall provide
the slippers, for he told me to take special care of Mother while
he was gone."

     "I'll tell you what we'll do," said Beth, "let's each get her
something for Christmas,land not get anything for ourselves."

     "That's like you, dear!  What will we get?" exclaimed Jo.

     Everyone thought soberly for a minute, then Meg announced, as
if the idea was suggested by the sight of her own pretty hands, "I
shall give her a nice pair of gloves."

     "Army shoes, best to be had," cried Jo.

     "Some handkerchiefs, all hemmed," said Beth.

     "I'll get a little bottle of cologne.  She likes it, and it
won't cost much, so I'll have some left to buy my pencils," added
Amy.

     "How will we give the things?" asked Meg.

     "Put them on the table, and bring her in and see her open
the bundles.  Don't you remember how we used to do on our birth-
days?" answered Jo.

     "I used to be so frightened when it was my turn to sit in the
chair with the crown on, and see you all come marching round to
give the presents, with a kiss.  I liked the things and the kisses,
but it was dreadful to have you sit looking at me while I opened
the bundles," said Beth, who was toasting her face and the bread
for tea at the same time.

     "Let Marmee think we are getting things for ourselves, and
then surprise her.  We must go shopping tomorrow afternoon, Meg.
There is so much to do about the play for Christmas night," said
Jo, marching up and down, with her hands behind her back, and her
nose in the air.

     "I don't mean to act any more after this time.  I'm getting
too old for such things," observed Meg, who was as much a child
as ever about `dressing-up' frolics.

     "You won't stop, I know, as long as you can trail round in a
white gown with your hair down, and wear gold-paper jewelry.  You
are the best actress we've got, and there'll be an end of every-
thing if you quit the boards," said Jo.  "We ought to rehearse
tonight. Come here,Amy, and do the fainting scene, for you are as
stiff as a poker in that."

     "I can't help it.  I never saw anyone faint, and I don't choose
to make myself all black and blue, tumbling flat as you do.  If I
can go down easily, I'll drop.  If I can't, I shall fall into a
chair and be graceful.  I don't care if Hugo does come at me with
a pistol," returned Amy, who was not gifted with dramatic power,
but was chosen because she was small enough to be borne out shrieking
by the villain of the piece.

     "Do it this way.  Clasp your hands so, and stagger across the
room, crying frantically, `Roderigo`  Save me! Save me! and away
went Jo, with a melodramatic scream which was truly thrilling.

     Amy followed, but she poked her hands out stiffly before her,
and jerked herself along as if she went by machinery, and her "Ow!"
was more suggestive of pins being run into her than of fear and
anguish.  Jo gave a despairing groan, and Meg laughed outright,
while Beth let her bread burn as she watched the fun with interest.

     "It's no use!  Do the best you can when the time comes, and if
the audience laughs, don't blame me.  Come on, Meg."

     "Then things went smoothly, for Don Pedro defied the world in
a speech of two pages without a single break. Hagar, the witch,
chanted an awful incantation over her kettleful of simmering toads,
with weird effect.  Roderigo rent his chains asunder manfully, and
Hugo died in agonies of remorse and arsenic, with a wild,"Ha! Ha!"

     "It's the best we've had yet," said Meg, as the dead villain
sat up and rubbed his elbows.

     "I don't see how you can write and act such splendid things,
Jo.  You're a regular Shakespeare!" exclaimed Beth, who firmly
believed that her sisters were gifted with wonderful genius in all
things.

     "Not quite," replied Jo modestly. "I do think THE WITCHES CURSE,
an Operatic Tragedy is rather a nice thing, but I'd like to try
McBETH, if we only had a trapdoor for Banquo.  I always wanted to
do the killing part.  `Is that a dagger that I see before me?"
muttered Jo, rolling her eyes and clutching at the air, as she had
seen a famous tragedian do.

     "No, it's the toasting fork, with Mother's shoe on it instead
of the bread.  Beth's stage-struck!"  cried Meg, and the rehearsal
ended in a general burst of laughter.

     "Glad to find you so merry, my girls," said a cheery voice at
the door, and actors and audience turned to welcome a tall, motherly
lady with a `can I help you' look about her which was truly delightful.
She was not elegantly dressed, but a noble-looking woman, and the
girls thought the gray cloak and unfashionable bonnet covered the most
splendid mother in the world.

     "Well, dearies, how have you got on today?  There was so much to
do, getting the boxes ready to go tomorrow, that I didn't come home
to dinner.  Has anyone called, Beth?  How is your cold, Meg?  Jo,
you look tired to death.  Come and kiss me, baby."

     While making these maternal inquiries Mrs. March got her wet
things off, her warm slippers on, and sitting down in the easy
chair, drew Amy to her lap, preparing to enjoy the happiest hour
of her busy day.  The girls flew about, trying to make things
comfortable, each in her own way.  Meg arranged the tea table, Jo
brought wood and set chairs, dropping, over-turning,and clattering
everything she touched.  Beth trotted to and fro between parlor
kitchen, quiet and busy, while Amy gave directions to everyone, as
she sat with her hands folded.

     As they gathered about the table, Mrs. March said, with a
particularly happy face, "I've got a treat for you after supper."

     A quick, bright smile went round like a streak of sunshine.
Beth clapped her hands, regardless of the biscuit she held,and
Jo tossed up her napkin, crying, "A letter! A letter! Three
cheers for Father!"

     "Yes, a nice long letter.  He is well, and thinks he shall
get through the cold season better than we feared. He sends all
sorts of loving wishes for Christmas, and an especial message
to you girls," said Mrs. March, patting her pocket as if she
had got a treasure there.

     "Hurry and get done!  Don't stop to quirk your little finger
and simper over your plate, Amy," cried Jo, choking on her tea
and dropping her bread, butter side down, on the carpet in her
haste to get at the treat.

     Beth ate no more, but crept away to sit in her shadowy corner
and brood over the delight to come, till the others were ready.

     "I think it was so splendid in Father to go as chaplain
when he was too old to be drafted, and not strong enough for
a soldier," said Meg warmly.

     "Don't I wish I could go as a drummer, a vivan--what's its
name?  Or a nurse, so I could be near him and help him," exclaimed
Jo, with a groan.

     "It must be very disagreeable to sleep in a tent, and eat
all sorts of bad-tasting things, and drink out of a tin mug,"
sighed Amy.

     "When will he come home, Marmee?  asked Beth, with a little
quiver in her voice.

     "Not for many months, dear, unless he is sick.  He will stay
and do his work faithfully as long as he can, and we won't ask
for him back a minute sooner than he can be spared.  Now come and
hear the letter."

     They all drew to the fire, Mother in the big chair with Beth
at her feet, Meg and Amy perched on either arm of the chair, and
Jo leaning on the back, where no one would see any sign of emotion
if the letter should happen to be touching.  Very few letters were
written in those hard times that were not touching, especially
those which fathers sent home.  In this one little was said of the
hardships endured, the dangers faced, or the homesickness con-
quered.  It was a cheerful, hopeful letter, full of lively descrip-
tions of camp life, marches, and military news, and only at the end
did the writer's heart over-flow with fatherly love and longing for
the little girls at home.

     " Give them all of my dear love and a kiss.  Tell them I think
of them by day, pray  for them by night, and find my best comfort
in their affection at all times.  A year seems very long to wait
before I see them, but remind them that while we wait we may all
work, so that these hard days need not be wasted.  I know they will
remember all I said to them, that they will be loving children to
you, will do their duty faithfully, fight their bosom enemies bravely,
and conquer themselves so beautifully that when I come back to them
I may be fonder and prouder than ever of my little women."

     Everybody sniffed when they came to that part.  Jo wasn't
ashamed of the great tear that dropped off the end of her nose, and
Amy never minded the rumpling of her curls as she hid her face on
her mother's shoulder and sobbed out, "I am a selfish girl!  But
I'll truly try to be better, so he mayn't be disappointed in me
by-and-by."

     We all will," cried Meg.  "I think too much of my looks and
hate to work, but won't any more, if I can help it."

     "I'll try and be what he loves to call me, `a little woman'
and not be rough and wild, but do my duty here instead of wanting
to be somewhere else," said Jo, thinking that keeping her temper
at home was a much harder task than facing a rebel or two down South.

     Beth said nothing, but wiped away her tears with the blue army
sock and began to knit with all her might, losing no time in doing
the duty that lay nearest her, while she resolved in her quiet
little soul to be all that Father hoped to find her when the year
brought round the happy coming home.

     Mrs. March broke the silence that followed Jo's words, by
saying in her cheery voice, "Do you remember how you used to play
Pilgrims Progress when you were little things?  Nothing delighted
you more than to have me tie my piece bags on your backs for burdens,
give you hats and sticks and rolls of paper, and let you travel
through the house from the cellar, which was the City of Destruction,
up, up, to the housetop, where you had all the lovely things you
could collect to make a Celestial City."

     "What fun it was, especially going by the lions, fighting
Apollyon, and passing through the valley where the hob-goblins
were," said Jo.

     "I liked the place where the bundles fell off and tumbled
downstairs," said Meg.

     "I don't remember much about it, except that I was afraid of
the cellar and the dark entry, and always liked the cake and milk
we had up at the top.  If I wasn't too old for such things, I'd
rather like to play it over again," said Amy, who began to talk
of renouncing childish  things at the mature age of twelve.

     "We never are too old for this, my dear, because it is a play
we are playing all the time in one way or another. Out burdens are
here, our road is before us, and the longing for goodness and
happiness is the guide that leads us through many troubles and mis-
takes to the peace which is a true Celestial City.  Now, my little
pilgrims, suppose you begin again, not in play, but in earnest,
and see how far on you can get before Father comes home."

     "Really, Mother?  Where are our bundles?" asked Amy, who was
a very literal young lady.

     "Each of you told what your burden was just now, except Beth.
I rather think she hasn't got any," said her mother.

     "Yes, I have.  Mine is dishes and dusters, and envying girls
with nice pianos, and being afraid of people."

     Beth's bundle was such a funny one that everybody wanted to
laugh, but nobody did, for it would have hurt her feelings very
much.

     "Let us do it," said Meg thoughtfully.  "It is only another
name for trying to be good, and the story may help us, for though
we do want to be good, it's hard work and we forget, and don't do
our best."

     "We were in the Slough of Despond tonight, and Mother came
and pulled us out as Help did in the book.  We ought to have our
roll of directions, like Christian.  What shall we do about that?"
asked Jo, delighted with the fancy which lent a little romance to
the very dull task of doing her duty.

     "Look under your pillows christmas morning, and you will
find your guidebook," replied Mrs. March.

     They talked over the new plan while old Hannah cleared the
table, then out came the four little work baskets, and the needles
flew as the girls made sheets for Aunt March.  It was uninteresting
sewing, but tonight no one grumbled.  They adopted Jo's plan of
dividing the long seams into four parts, and calling the quarters
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, and in that way got on capitally,
especially when they talked about the different countries as they
stitched their way through them.

     At nine they stopped work, and sang, as usual, before they
went to bed.  No one but Beth could get much music out of the old
piano, but she had a way of softly touching the yellow keys and
making a pleasant accompaniment to the simple songs they sang.  Meg
had a voice like a flute, and she and herr mother led the little
choir.  Amy chirped like a cricket, and Jo wandered through the airs
at her own sweet will, always coming out at the wrong place with a
croak or a quaver that spoiled the most pensive tune.  They had
always done this from the time they could lisp . . .

                  Crinkle, crinkle, 'ittle 'tar,

and it had become a household custom,, for the mother was a born
singer.  The first sound in the morning was her voice as she went
about the house singing like a lark, and the last sound at night
was the same cheery sound, for the girls never grew too old for
that familiar lullaby.

                        CHAPTER TWO

     Jo was the first to wake in the gray dawn of Christmas morn-
ing.  No stockings hung at the fireplace, and for a moment she
felt as much disappointed as she did long ago, when her little
sock fell down because it was crammed so full of goodies. Then
she remembered her mother's promise and, slipping her hand under
her pillow, drew out a little crimson-covered book.  She knew
it very well, for it was that beautiful old story of the best
life ever lived, and Jo felt that it was a true guidebook for
any pilgrim going on a long journey.  She woke Meg with a "Merry
Christmas," and bade her see what was under her pillow. A green-
covered book appeared, with the same picture inside, and a few
words written by their mother, which made their one present very
precious in their eyes.  Presently Beth and Amy woke to rummage
and find their little books also, one dove-colored, the other
blue, and all sat looking at and talking about them, while the
east grew rosy with the coming day.

     In spite of her small vanities, Margaret had a sweet and
pious nature, which unconsciously influenced her sisters, espec-
ially Jo, who loved her very tenderly, and obeyed her because
her advice was so gently given.

     "Girls," said Meg seriously, looking from the tumbled head
beside her to the two little night-capped ones in the room beyond,
"Mother wants us to read and love and mind these books, and we
must begin at once.  We used to be faithful about it, but since
Father went away and all this war trouble unsettled us, we have
neglected many things. You can do as you please, but I shall keep
my book on the table here and read a little every morning as soon
as I wake, for I know it will do me good and help me through the
day."

     Then she opened her new book and began to read.  Jo put her
arm round her and, leaning cheek to cheek, read also, with the
quiet expression so seldom seen on her restless face.

     "How good Meg is!  Come, Amy, let's do as they do.  I'll
help you with the hard words, and they'' explain things if we
don't understand," whispered Beth, very much impressed by the
pretty books and her sisters, example.

     "I'm glad mine is blue," said Amy.  and then the rooms were
very still while the pages were softly turned, and the winter
sunshine crept in to touch the bright heads and serious faces
with a Christmas greeting.

     "Where is Mother?" asked Meg, as she and Jo ran down to
thank her for their gifts, half an hour later.

     "Goodness only knows. some poor creeter came a-beggin', and
your ma went straight off to see what was needed.  There never was
such a woman for givin' away vittles and drink, clothes and firin',"
replied Hannah, who had lived with the family since Meg was born,
and was considered by them all more as a friend than a servant.

     "She will be back soon, I think, so fry your cakes, and have
everything ready," said Meg, looking over the presents which were
collected in a basket and kept under the sofa, ready to be pro-
duced at the proper time.  "why, where is Amy's bottle of cologne?"
she added, as the little flask did not appear.

     "She took it out a minute ago, and went off with it to put a
ribbon on it, or some such notion," replied Jo, dancing about the
room to take the first stiffness off the new army slippers.

     "How nice my handkerchiefs look, don't they?  Hannah washed
and ironed them for me, and I marked them all myself," said Beth,
looking proudly at the somewhat uneven letters which had cost her
such labor.

     "Bless the child!  She's gone and put `Mother' on them in-
stead of `M. March'.  How funny!" cried Jo, taking one up.

     "Isn't that right?  I thought it was better to do it so,
because Meg's initials are M.M., and I don't want anyone to use
these but Marmee," said Beth;, looking troubled.

     "It's all right, dear, and a very pretty idea, quite sensible
too, for no one can ever mistake now. It will please her very much,
I know," said Meg, with a frown for Jo and a smile for Beth.

     "There's Mother. Hide the basket, quick!" cried Jo, as a door
slammed and steps sounded in the hall.

     Amy came in hastily, and looked rather abashed when she saw
her sisters all waiting for her.

     "Where have you been, and what are you hiding behind you?"
asked Meg, surprised to see, by her hood and cloak, that lazy Amy
had been out so early.

     "Don't laugh at me, Jo!  I didn't mean anyone should know till
the time came.  I only meant to change the little bottle for a big
one, and I gave all my money to get it, and I'm truly trying not
to be selfish any more."

     As she spoke, Amy showed the handsome flask which replaced
the cheap one, and looked so earnest and humble in her little
effort to forget herself that Meg hugged her on the spot, and Jo
pronounced her `a trump', while Beth ran to the window, and picked
her finest rose to ornament the stately bottle.

     "You see I felt ashamed of my present, after reading and talking
about being good this morning, so I ran round the corner and changed
it the minute I was up, and I'm so glad, for mine is the handsomest
now."

     Another bang of the street door sent the basket under the sofa,
and the girls to the table, eager for breakfast.

     "Merry Christmas, Marmee!  Many of them!  Thank you for our
books.  We read some, and mean to every day," they all cried in
chorus.

     "Merry Christmas, little daughters!  I'm glad you began at
once, and hope you will keep on.  But I want to say one word
before we sit down.  Not far away from here lies a poor woman
with a little newborn baby.  Six children are huddled into one bed
to keep from freezing, for they have no fire.  There is nothing to
eat over there, and the oldest boy came to tell me they were suffer-
ing hunger and cold.  My girls, will you give them your breakfast
as a Christmas present?"

     They were all unusually hungry, having waited nearly an hour,
and for a minute no one spoke, only a minute, for Jo exclaimed im-
petuously, "I'm so glad you came before we began!"

     "May I go and help carry the things to the poor little children?"
asked Beth eagerly.

     "I shall take the cream and the muffings," added Amy, heroically
giving up the article she most liked.

     Meg was already covering the buckwheats, and piling the bread
into one big plate.

     "I thought you'd do it," said Mrs. March, smiling as if satisfied.
"You shall all go and help me, and when we come back we will have bread
and milk for breakfast, and make it up at dinnertime."

     They were soon ready, and the procession set out.  Fortunately
it was early, and they went through back streets, so few people saw
them, and no one laughed at the queer party.

     A poor, bare, miserable room it was, with broken windows, no
fire, ragged bedclothes, a sick mother, wailing baby, and a group
of pale, hungry children cuddled under one old quilt, trying to
keep warm.

     How the big eyes stared and the blue lips smiled as the girls
went in.

     "Ach, mein Gott!  It is good angels come to us!"  said the poor
woman, crying for joy.

     "Funny angels in hoods and mittens," said Jo, and set them to
laughing.

     In a few minutes it really did seem as if kind spirits had been
at work there.  Hannah, who had carried wood, made a fire, and
stopped up the broken panes with old hats and her own cloak.  Mrs.
March gave the mother tea and gruel, and comforted her with promises
of help, while she dressed the little baby as tenderly as if it had
been her own.  The girls meantime spread the table, set the children
round the fire, and fed them like so many hungry birds, laughing,
talking, and trying to understand the funny broken English.

     "Das ist gut!" "Die Engel-kinder!" cried the poor things as
they ate and warmed their purple hands at the comfortable blaze.

     The girls had never been called angel children before, and
thought it very agreeable, especially Jo, who had been considered
a `Sancho' ever since she was born.  That was a very happy break-
fast, though they didn't get any of it.  And when they went away,
leaving comfort behind, I think there were not in all the city
four merrier people than the hungry little girls who gave away
their breakfasts and contented themselves with bread and milk
on Christmas morning.

     "That's loving our neighbor better than ourselves, and I
like it," said Meg, as they set out their presents while their
mother was upstairs collecting clothes for the poor Hummels.

     Not a very splendid show, but there was a great deal of
love done up in the few little bundles, and the tall vase of
red roses, white chrysanthemums, and trailing vines, which
stood in the middle, gave quite an elegant air to the table.

     "She's coming!  Strike up, Beth!  Open the door, Amy!  Three
cheers for Marmee!" cried Jo, prancing about while Meg went to
conduct Mother to the seat of honor.

     Beth played her gayest march, amy threw open the door, and
Meg enacted escort with great dignity.  Mrs. March was both
surprised and touched, and smiled with her eyes full as she
examined her presents and read the little notes which accompanied
them.  The slippers went on at once, a new handkerchief was slipped
into her pocket, well scented with Amy's cologne, the rose was
fastened in her bosom, and the nice gloves were pronounced a perfect
fit.

    There was a good deal of laughing and kissing and explaining,
in the simple, loving fashion which makes these home festivals so
pleasant at the time, so sweet to remember long afterward, and
then all fell to work.

     The morning charities and ceremonies took so much time that
the rest of the day was devoted to preparations for the evening
festivities.  Being still too young to go often to the theater,
and not rich enough to afford any great outlay for private per-
formances, the girls put their wits to work, and necessity being
the  mother of invention, made whatever they needed.  Very clever
were some of their productions, pasteboard guitars, antique lamps
made of old-fashioned butter boats covered with silver paper,
gorgeous robes of old cotton, glittering with tin spangles from
a pickle factory, and armor covered with the same useful diamond
shaped bits left inn sheets when the lids of preserve pots were
cut out.  The big chamber was the scene of many innocent revels.

     No gentleman were admitted, so Jo played male parts to her
heart's content and took immense satisfaction in a pair of russet
leather boots given her by a friend, who knew a  lady who knew an
actor.  These boots, an old foil, and a slashed doublet once used
by an artist for some picture, were Jo's chief treasures and
appeared on all occasions.  The smallness of the company made it
necessary  for the two principal actors to take several parts
apiece, and they certainly deserved some credit for the hard work
they did in learning three or four different parts, whisking in
and out of various costumes, and managing the stage besides.  It
was excellent drill for their memories, a harmless amusement, and
employed many hours which otherwise would have been idle, lonely,
or spent in less profitable society.

     On christmas night, a dozen girls piled onto the bed which
was the dress circle, and sat before the blue and yellow chintz
curtains in a most flattering state of expectancy.  There was a
good deal of rustling and whispering behind the curtain, a trifle
of lamp smoke,and an occasional giggle from Amy, who was apt to
get hysterical in the excitement of the moment.  Presently a bell
sounded, the curtains flew apart, and the OPERATIC TRAGEDY began.

     "A gloomy wood," according to the one playbill, was repre-
sented by a few shrubs in pots, green baize on the floor, and a
cave in the distance.  This cave was made with a clothes horse
for a roof, bureaus for walls, and in it was a small furnace in
full blast, with a black pot on it and an old witch bending over
it.  The stage was dark and the glow of the furnace had a fine
effect, especially as real steam issued from the kettle when the
witch took off the cover.  A moment was allowed for the first
thrill to subside, then Hugo, the villain, stalked in with a
clanking sword at his side, a slouching hat, black beard, mys-
terious cloak, and the boots.  After pacing to and fro in much
agitation, he struck his forehead, and burst out in a wild
strain, singing of his hatred to Roderigo, his love for Zara,
and his pleasing resolution to kill the one and win the other.
The gruff tones of Hugo's voice, with an occasional shout when
his feelings overcame him, were very impressive, and the audience
applauded the moment he paused for breath.  bowing with the air
of one accustomed to public praise, he stole to the cavern and
ordered Hagar to come forth with a commanding, "What ho, minion!
I need thee!"

     Out came Meg, with gray horsehair hanging about her face,
a red and black robe, a staff, and cabalistic signs upon her
cloak.  Hugo demanded a potion to make Zara adore him, and one
destroy Roderigo.  Hagar, in a fine dramatic melody, promised
both, and proceeded to call up the spirit who would bring the
love philter.

               Hither, hither,from thy home,
               Airy sprite, I bid thee come!
               Born of roses, fed on dew,
               Charms and potions canst thou brew?
               Bring me here, with elfin speed,
               The fragrant philter which I need.
               Make it sweet and swift and strong,
               Spirit, answer now my song!

     A soft strain of music sounded, and then at the back of the
cave appeared a little figure in cloudy white, with glittering
wings, golden hair, and a garland of roses on its head.  Waving
a wand, it sang . . .

               Hither I come,
               From my airy home,
               Afar in the silver moon.
               Take the magic spell,
               And use it well,
               Or its power will vanish soon!

     And dropping a small, gilded bottle at the witch's feet, the
spirit vanished.  Another chant from Hagar produced another apparition,
not a lovely one, for with a bang an ugly black imp appeared and,
having croaked a reply, tossed a dark bottle at Hugo and disappeared
with a mocking laugh.  Having warbled his thanks and put the potions
in his boots, Hugo departed, and Hagar informed the audience that
as he had killed a few of her friends in times past, she had cursed
him, and intends to thwart his plans, and be revenged on him.  Then
the curtain fell, and the audience reposed and ate candy while dis-
cussing the merits of the play.

     A good deal of hammering went on before the curtain rose again,
but when it became evident what a masterpiece of stage carpentery
had been got up, no one murmured at the delay. It was truly superb.
A tower rose to the ceiling, halfway up appeared a window with a
lamp burning in it, and behind the white curtain appeared Zara in
a lovely blue and silver dress, waiting for Roderigo.  He came in
gorgeous array, with plumed cap, red cloak, chestnut lovelocks, a
guitar, and the boots, of course.  Kneeling at the foot of the tower,
he sang a serenade in melting tones.  Zara replied and, after a
musical dialogue, consented to fly.  Then came the grand effect of
the play.  Roderigo produced a rope ladder, with five steps to it,
threw up one end, and invited Zara to descend.  Timidly she crept
from her lattice, put her hand on Roderigo's shoulder, and was
about to leap gracfully down when "Alas!  Alas for Zara!" she
forgot her train.  It caught in the window, the tower tottered,
leaned forward, fell with a crash, and buried the unhappy lovers
in the ruins.

     A universal shriek arose as the russet boots waved wildly
from the wreck and a golden head emerged, exclaiming, "I told you
so!  I told you so!" With wonderful presence of mind, Don Pedro,
the cruel sire, rushed in, dragged out his daughter, with a hasty
aside . . .

     "Don't laugh!  Act as if it was all right!"  and, ordering
Roderigo up, banished him form the kingdom with wrath and scorn.
Though decidedly shaken by the fall from the tower upon him,
Roderigo defied the old gentleman and refused to stir.  This
dauntless example fired Zara.  She also defied her sire, and he
ordered them both to the deepest dungeons of the castle.  A stout
little retainer came in with chains and led them away, looking very
much frightened and evidently forgetting the speech he ought to
have made.

     Act third was the castle hall, and here Hagar appeared, having
come to free the lovers and finish Hugo.  She hears him coming and
hides, sees him put the potions into two cups of wine and bid the
the timid little servant, "Bear them to the captives in their cells,
and tell them I shall come anon."  The servant takes Hugo aside to
tell him something, and Hagar changes the cups for two others which
are harmless.  Ferdinando, the `minion', carries them away, and
Hagar puts back the cup which holds the poison meant for Roderigo.
Hugo, getting thirsty after a long warble, drinks it, loses his wits,
and after a good deal of clutching and stamping, falls flat and dies,
while Hagar informs him what she has done in a song of exquisite
power and melody.

     This was a truly thrilling scene, though some persons might
have thought that the sudden tumbling down of a quantity of long red
hair rather marred the effect of the villain's death.  He was called
before the curtain, and with great propriety appeared, leading Hagar,
whose singing was considered more wonderful than all the rest of the
performance put together.

     Act fourth displayed the despairing Roderigo on the point of
stabbing himself because he has been told that Zara has deserted him.
Just as the dagger is at his heart, a lovely song is sung under his
window, informing him that Zara is true but in danger, and he can
save her if he will.  A key is thrown in, which unlocks the door,
and in a spasm of rapture he tears off his chains and rushes away
to find and rescue his lady love.

     Act fifth opened with a stormy scene between Zara and Don Pedro.
He wishes her to go into a convent, but she won't hear of it, and
after a touching appeal, is about to faint when Roderigo dashes in
and demands her hand.  Don Pedro refuses, because he is not rich.
They shout and gesticulate tremendously but cannot agree, and Rod-
rigo is about to bear away the exhausted Zara, when the timid
servant enters with a letter and a bag from Hagar,   who has myster-
iously disappeared.  The latter informs the party that she bequeths
untold wealth to the young pair and an awful doom to Don Pedro, if
he doesn't make them happy. The bag is opened, and several quarts of
tin money shower down upon the stage till it is quite glorified with
the glitter.  This entirely softens the stern sire.  He consents
without a murmur, all join in a joyful chorus, and the curtain falls
upon the lovers kneeling to receive Don Pedro's blessing in attitudes
of the most romantic grace.

     Tumultuous applause followed but received an unexpected check,
for the cot bed, on which the dress circle was built, suddenly shut
up and extinguished the enthusiastic audience.  Roderigo and Don
Pedro flew to the rescue, and all were taken out unhurt, though many
were speechless with laughter.  the excitement had hardly subsided
when Hannah appeared, with "Mrs. March's compliments, and would the
ladies walk down to supper."

     This was a surprise even to the actors, and when they saw the
table, they looked at one another in rapturous amazement.  It was
like Marmee to get up a little treat for them, but anything so fine
as this was unheard of since the departed days of plenty. There was
ice cream, actually two dishes of it, pink and white, and cake and
fruit and distracting french bonbons and, in the middle of the
table, four great bouquets of hot house flowers.

     It quite took their breath away, and they stared first at the
table and then at their mother, who looked as if she enjoyed it
immensely.

     "Is it fairies?" asked Amy.

     "Santa Claus," said Beth.

     "Mother did it." And Meg smiled her sweetest, in spite of her
gray beard and white eyebrows.

     "Aunt March had a good fit and sent the supper," cried Jo, with
a sudden inspiration.

     "All wrong.  Old Mr. Laurence sent it," replied Mrs. March.

     "The Laurence boy's grandfather! What in the world put such a
thing into his head?  We don't know him!' exclaimed Meg.

     "Hannah told one of his servants about your breakfast party.
He is an odd old gentleman, but that pleased him.  He knew my father
years ago, and he sent me a polite note this afternoon, saying he
hoped I would allow him to express his friendly feeling toward my
children by sending them a few trifles in honor of the day.  I
could not refuse, and so you have a little feast at night to make
up for the bread-and-milk breakfast."

     "That boy; put it into his head, I know he did!  He's a capital
fellow, and I wish we could get acquainted.  He looks as if he'd
like to know us but he's bashful, and Meg is so prim she won't let
me speak to him when we pass," said Jo, as the plates went round,
and the ice began to melt out of sight, with ohs and ahs of satisfaction.

     "You mean the people who live in the big house next door, don't
you?" asked one of the girls.  "My mother knows old Mr. Laurence,
but says he's very proud and doesn't like to mix with his neighbors.
He keeps his grandson shut up, when he isn't riding or walking with
his tutor, and makes him study very hard.  We invited him to our
party, but he didn't come.  Mother says he's very nice, though he
never speaks to us girls."

     "Our cat ran away once, and he brought her back, and we
talked over the fence, and were getting on capitally, all about
cricket, and so on, when he saw Meg coming, and walked off.  I
mean to know him some day, for he needs fun, I'm sure he does,"
said Jo decidedly.

     "I like his manners, and he looks like a little gentleman, so
I've no objection to your knowing him, if a proper opportunity comes.
He brought the flowers himself, and I should have asked him in, if
I had been sure what was going on upstairs. He looked so wistful
as he went away, hearing the frolic and evidently having none of
his own."

     "It's a mercy you didn't , Mother!" laughed Jo, looking at
her boots.  "But we'll have another play sometime that he can
see.  Perhaps he'll help act.  Wouldn't that be jolly?"

     "I never had such a fine bouquet before!  How pretty it is!"
And Meg examined her flowers with great interest.

     "They are lovely.  But Beth's roses are sweeter to me," said
Mrs. March, smelling the half-dead posy in her belt.

     Beth nestled up to her, and whispered softly, "I wish I
could send my bunch to Father.  I'm afraid he isn't having such
a merry Christmas as we are."

                      CHAPTER THREE

     "Jo!  Jo!  Where are you?" cried Meg at the foot of the garret
stairs.

     "Here!" answered a husky voice from above, and, running up,
Meg found her sister eating apples and crying over the HEIR OF
REDCLYFFE, wrapped up in a comforter on an old three-legged sofa
by the sunny window.  This was Jo's favorite refuge, and here she
loved to retire with half a dozen russets and a nice book, to enjoy
the quiet and the society of a pet rat who lived near by and didn't
mind her a particle.  As Meg appeared, Scrabble whisked into his
hole. Jo shook the tears off her cheeks and waited to hear the news.

     "Such fun!  Only see!  A regular note of invitation from Mrs.
Gardiner for tomorrow night!" cried Meg, waving the precious paper
and then proceeding to read it with girlish delight.

     "`Mrs. Gardiner would be happy to see Miss March and Miss Jo-
sephine at a little dance on New Year's Eve.' Marmee is willing we
should go, now what shall we wear?"

     "What's the use of asking that, when you know we shall wear
our poplins, because we haven't got anything else?" answered Jo
with her mouth full.

     "If I only had a silk!" sighed Meg.  "Mother says I may when
I'm eighteen perhaps, but two years is an everlasting time to wait."

     "I'm sure our pops look like silk, and they are nice enough for
us.  Yours is as good as new, but I forgot the burn and the tear in
mine.  Whatever shall I do?  The burn shows badly, and I can't take
any out."

     "You must sit still all you can and keep your back out of sight.
The front is all right.  I shall have a new ribbon for my hair, and
Marmee will lend me her little pearl pin, and my new slippers are
lovely, and my gloves will do, though they aren't as nice as I'd like."

     "Mine are spoiled with lemonade, and I can't get any new ones,
so I shall have to go without," said Jo, who never troubled herself
much about dress.

     "You must have gloves, or I won't go," cried Meg decidedly.
"Gloves are more important than anything else.  You can't dance
without them, and if you don't I should be so mortified."

     "Then I'll stay still.  I don't care much for company dancing.
It's no fun to go sailing round.  I like to fly about and cut capers."

     "You can't ask Mother for new ones, they are so expensive, and
you are so careless.  She said when you spoiled the others that she
shouldn't get you any more this winter.  Can't you make them do?"

     "I can hold them crumpled up in my hand, so no one will know
how stained they are.  That's all I can do. No!  I'll tell you how
we can manage, each wear one good one and carry a bad one.  Don't
you see?"

     "Your hands are bigger than mine, and you will stretch my glove
dreadfully," began Meg, whose gloves were a tender point with her.

     "Then I'll go without.  I don't care what people say!" cried Jo,
taking up her book.

     "You may have it, you may!  Only don't stain it, and do behave
nicely.  Don't put your hands behind you, or stare, or say `Christopher
Columbus!' will you?"

     "Don't worry about me. I'll be as prim ad I can and not get
into any scrapes, if I can help it.  Now go and answer your note,
and let me finish this splendid story."

     So Meg went away to `accept with thanks', look over her dress,
and sing blithely as she did up her one real lace frill, while Jo
finished her story, her four apples, and had a game of romps with
Scrabble.

     On New Year's Eve the parlor was deserted, for the two younger
girls played dressing maids and the two elder were absorbed in the
all-important business of `getting ready for the party'.  Simple
as the toilets were, there was a great deal of running up and down,
laughing and talking, and at one time a strong smell of burned hair
pervaded the house.  Meg wanted a few curls about her face, and Jo
undertook to pinch the papered locks with a pair of hot tongs.

     "Ought they to smoke like that?" asked Beth  from her perch
on the bed.

     "It's the dampness drying," replied Jo.

     "What a queer smell!  It's like burned feathers," observed Amy,
smoothing her own pretty curls with a superior air.

     "There, now I'll take off the papers and you'll see a cloud
of little ringlets," said Jo, putting down the tongs.

     She did take off the papers, but no cloud of ringlets appeared,
for the hair came with the papers, and the horrified hairdresser
laid a row of little scorched bundles on the bureau before her victim.

     "Oh, oh, oh! What have you done?  I'm spoiled!  I can't go!  My
hair, oh, my hair!" wailed Meg, looking with despair at the uneven
frizzle on her forehead.

     "Just my luck!  You shouldn't have asked me to do it. I always
spoil everything.  I'm so sorry, but the tongs were too hot, and so
I've made a mess," groaned poor Jo, regarding the little black
pancakes with tears of regret.

     "It isn't spoiled.  Just frizzle it, and tie your ribbon so
the ends come on your forehead a bit, and it will look like the
last fashion.  I've seen many girls do it so," said Amy consolingly.

     "Serves me right for trying to be fine.  I wish I'd let my hair
alone," cried Meg petulantly.

     "So do I, it was so smooth and pretty.  But it will soon grow
out again," said Beth, coming to kiss and comfort the shorn sheep.

     After various lesser mishaps, Meg was finished at last, and
by the united exertions of the entire family Jo's hair was got up
and her dress on.  They looked very well in their simple suits,
Meg's in silvery drab, with a blue velvet snood, lace frills, and
the pearl pin.  Jo in maroon, with a stiff, gentlemanly linen
collar, and a white chrysanthemum or two for her only ornament.
Each put on one nice light glove, and carried one soiled one, and
all pronounced the effect "quite easy and fine".  Meg's high-heeled
slippers were very tight and hurt her, though she would not own it,
and Jo's nineteen hairpins all seemed stuck straight into her head,
which was not exactly comfortable, but, dear me, let us be elegant
or die.

     "Have a good time, dearies!"  said Mrs. March, as the sisters
went daintily down the walk.  "Don't eat much supper, and come
away at eleven when I send Hannah for you."  As the gate clashed
behind them, a voice cried from a window . . .

     "Girls, girls!  Have you you both got nice pocket handkerchiefs?"

     "Yes, yes, spandy nice, and Meg has cologne on hers," cried Jo,
adding with a laugh as they went on, "I do believe Marmee would ask
that if we were all running away from an earthquake.

     "It is one of her aristocratic tastes, and quite proper, for a
real lady is always known by neat boots,  gloves, and handkerchief,"
replied Meg, who had a good many little `aristocratic tastes' of
her own.

     "Now don't forget to keep the bad breadth out of sight, Jo.
Is my sash right?  And does my hair look very bad?" said Meg, as
she turned from the glass in Mrs. Gardiner's dressing room after
a prolonged prink.

     "I know I shall forget.  If you see me doing anything wrong,
just remind me by a wink, will you?" returned Jo, giving her
collar a twitch and her head a hasty brush.

     "No, winking isn't ladylike.  I'll lift my eyebrows if any
thing is wrong, and nod if you are all right.  Now hold your
shoulder straight, and take short steps, and don't shake hands if
you are introduced to anyone.  It isn't the thing."

     "How do you learn all the proper ways?  I never can.  Isn't
that music gay?"

     Down they went, feeling a trifle timid, for they seldom went
to parties, and informal as this little gathering was, it was an
event to them.  Mrs. Gardiner, a stately old lady, greeted them
kindly  and handed them over to the eldest of her six daughters.
Meg knew Sallie and was at her ease very soon, but Jo, who didn't
care much for girls or girlish gossip, stood about, with her back
carefully against the wall, and felt as much out of place as a
colt in a flower garden.  Half a dozen jovial lads were talking
about skates in another part of the room, and she longed to go and
join them, for skating was one of the joys of her life.  She tele-
graphed her wish to Meg, but the eyebrows went up so alarmingly
that she dared not stir.  No one came to talk to her, and one by
one the group dwindled away till she was left alone.  She could
not roam about and amuse herself, for the burned breadth would
show, so she stared at people rather forlornly till the dancing
began.  Meg was asked at once, and the tight slippers tripped
about so briskly that none would have guessed the pain their
wearer suffered smilingly.  Jo saw a big red headed youth
approaching her corner, and fearing he meant to engage her, she
slipped into a curtained recess, intending to peep and enjoy
herself in peace.  Unfortunately, another bashful person had
chosen the same refuge, for, as the curtain fell behind her,
she found herself face to face with the `Laurence boy'.

     "Dear me, I didn't know anyone was here!" stammered Jo,
preparing to back out as speedily as she had bounced in.

     But the boy laughed and said pleasantly, though he looked
a little startled, "Don't mind me, stay if you like."

     "Shan't I disturb you?"

     "Not a bit.  I only came here because I don't know many
people and felt rather strange at first, you know."

     "So did I.  Don't go away, please, unless you'd rather."

     The boy sat down again and looked at his pumps, till Jo
said, trying to be polite and easy, "I think I've had the pleasure
of seeing you before.  You live near us, don't you?"

     "Next door."  And he looked up and laughed outright, for Jo's
prim manner was rather funny when he remembered how they had chatted
about cricket when he brought the cat home.

     That put Jo at her ease and she laughed too, as she said, in
her heartiest way, "We did have such a good time over your nice
Christmas present."

     "Grandpa sent it."

     "But you put it into his head, didn't you, now?"

     "How is your cat, Miss March?"  asked the boy, trying to look
sober while his black eyes shone with fun.

     "Nicely, thank you, Mr. Laurence.  But I am not Miss March, I'm
only Jo," returned the young lady.

     "I'm not Mr. Laurence, I'm only Laurie."

     "Laurie Laurence, what an odd name."

     "My first name is theodore, but I don't like it, for the
fellows called me Dora, so I made the say Laurie instead."

     "I hate my name, too, so sentimental!  I wish every one would
say Jo instead of Josephine.  How did you make the boys stop calling
you Dora?"

     "I thrashed `em."

     "I can't thrash Aunt March, so I suppose I shall have to bear
it."  And Jo resigned herself with a sigh.

     "Don't you like to dance, Miss Jo?" asked Laurie, looking
as if he thought the name suited her.

     "I like it well enough if there is plenty of room, and every-
one is lively.  In a place like this I'm sure to upset something,
tread on people's toes, or do something dreadful, so I keep out
of mischief and let Meg sail about. Don't you dance?"

     "Sometimes. You see I've been abroad a good many years, and
haven't been into company enough yet to know how you do things here."

     "Abroad!." cried Jo.  "Oh, tell me about it!  I love dearly to
hear people describe their travels."

     Laurie didn't seem to know where to begin, but Jo's eager
questions soon set him going, and he told her how he had been at
school in Vevay, where the boys never wore hats and had a fleet of
boats on the lake, and for holiday fun went on walking trips about
Switzerland with their teachers.

     "Don't I wish I'd been there!" cried Jo.  "Did you go to Paris?"

     "We spent last winter there."

     "Can you talk French?"

     "We were not allowed to speak anything else at Vevay."

     "Do say some!  I can read it, but can't pronounce."

     "Quel nom a cetter jeune demoiselle en les pantoulles jolis?"

     "How nicely you do it!  Let me see . . . you said, `Who is the
young lady in the pretty slippers', didn't you?"

    "Oui, mademoiselle."

    "It's my sister Margaret, and you knew it was!  Do you think
she is pretty?"

     "Yes, she makes me think of the German girls, she looks so
fresh and quiet, and dances like a lady."

     Jo quite glowed with pleasure at this boyish praise of her
sister, and stored it up to repeat to Meg.  Both peeped and
critisized and chatted till they felt like old acquaintances.  Laurie's
bashfulness soon wore off, for Jo's gentlemanly demeanor amused and
set him at his ease, and Jo was her merry self again, because her
dress was forgotten and nobody lifted their eyebrows at her.  She
liked the `Laurence boy' better than ever and took several good
looks at him, so that she might describe him to the girls, for they
had no brothers, very few male cousins, and boys were almost unknown
creatures to them.

     "Curly black hair, brown skin, big black eyes,  handsome nose,
fine teeth, small hands and feet, taller than I am, very polite,
for a boy, and altogether jolly.  Wonder how old he is?"

     It was on the tip of Jo's tongue to ask, but she checked
herself in time and, with unusual tact, tried to find out in a
round-about way.

     "I suppose you are going to college soon?  I see you pegging
away at your books, no, I mean studying hard."  And Jo blushed
at the dreadful `pegging' which had escaped her.

     Laurie smiled but didn't seem shocked, and answered with a
shrug.  "Not for a year or two.  I won't go before seventeen,
anyway."

     "Aren't you but fifteen?" asked Jo, looking at the tall lad,
whom she had imagined seventeen already.

     "Sixteen, next month."

     "How I wish I was going to college!  You don't look as if
you liked it."

     "I hate it!  Nothing but grinding or skylarking.  And I don't
like the way fellows do either, in this country."

     "What do you like?"

     "To live in Italy, and to enjoy myself in my own way."

     Jo wanted very much to ask what his own way was, but his
black brows looked rather threatening as he knit them, so she
changed the subject by saying, as her foot kept time, "That's a
splendid polka!  Why don't you go and try it?"

     "If you will come too," he answered, with a gallant little bow.

     "I can't, for I told meg I wouldn't, because . . ." There Jo
stopped, and looked undecided whether to tell or to laugh.

     "Because, what?"

     "You won't tell?"

     "Never!"

     "Well, I have a bad trick of standing before the fire, and so
I burn my frocks, and I scorched this one, and though it's nicely
mended, it shows, and Meg told me to keep still so no one would
see it.  You may laugh, if you want to.  It is funny, I know."

     But Laurie didn't laugh. He only looked dawn a minute, and
the expression of his face puzzled Jo when he said very gently,
"Never mind that.  I'll tell you how we can manage.  There's a long
hall out there, and we can dance grandly, and no one will see us.
Please come."

     Jo thanked him and gladly went, wishing she had two neat gloves
when she saw the nice, pearl-colored ones her partner wore.  The
hall was empty, and they had a grand polka, for Laurie danced well,
and taught her the German step, which delighted Jo,being full of
swing and spring>  When the music stopped, they sat down on the
stairs to get their breath, and Laurie was in the midst of an account
of a students' festival at Heidelberg when Meg appeared in search of
her sister.  She beckoned, and Jo reluctantly followed her into a
side room, where she found her on a sofa, holding her foot, and
looking pale.

     "I've sprained my ankle.  That stupid high heel turned and
gave me a sad wrench.  It aches so, I can hardly stand, and I don't
know how I'm ever going to get home," she said, rocking to and fro
in pain.

     "I knew you'd hurt your feet with those silly shoes.  I'm
sorry.  But I don't see what you can do, except get a carriage, or
stay here all night," answered Jo, softly rubbing the poor ankle as
she spoke.

     "I can't have a carriage without its costing ever so much.  I
dare say I can't get one at all, for most people come in their own,
and it's a long way to the stable, and no one to send."

     "I'll go."

     "No, indeed!  It's past nine, and dark as Egypt.  I can't stop
here, for the house is full.  Sallie has some girls staying with her.
I'll rest till Hannah comes, and then do the best I can."

     "I'll ask Laurie.  He will go," said Jo," looking relieved as
the idea occurred to her.

     "Mercy, no!  Don't ask or tell anyone.  Get me my rubbers, and
put these slippers with our things.  I can't dance anymore, but as
soon as supper is over, watch for Hannah and tell me the minute she
comes."

     "They are going out to supper now.  I'll stay with you.  I'd
rather."

     "No, dear, run along, and bring me some coffee.  I'm so tired
I can't stir."

     So Meg reclined, with rubbers well hidden, and Jo went blund-
ering away to the dining room, which she found after going into a
china closet, and opening the door of a room where old Mr. Gardiner
was taking a little private refreshment.  Making a dart at the
table, she secured the coffee, which she immediately spilled,
thereby making the front of her dress as bad as the back.

     "Oh, dear, what a blunderbuss I am!"  exclaimed Jo, finish-
ing Meg's glove by scrubbing her gown with it.

     "Can I help you?" said a friendly voice.  And there was Laurie,
with a full cup in one hand and a plate of ice in the other.

     "I was trying to get something for Meg, who is very tired, and
someone shook me, and here I am in a nice state," answered Jo,
glancing dismally from the stained skirt to the coffee-colored glove.

     "Too bad!   I was looking for someone to give this to.  May I
take it to your sister?"

     "Oh, thank you!  I'll show you where she is.  I don't offer to
take it myself, for I should only get into another scrape if I did."

     Jo led the way, and as if used to waiting on ladies, Laurie
drew up a little table, brought a second installment of coffee and
ice for Jo, and was so obliging that even particular Meg pronounced
him a `nice boy'.  They had a merry time over the bonbons and mottoes,
and were in the midst of a quiet game of BUZZ, with two or three
other young people who had strayed in, when Hannah appeared.  Meg
forgot her foot and rose so quickly that she was forced to catch
hold of Jo, with an exclamation of pain.

     "Hush!  Don't say anything," she whispered, adding aloud, "It's
nothing.  I turned my foot a little, that's all,"  and limped upstairs
to put her things on.

     Hannah scolded, Meg cried, and Jo was at her wits' end, till
se decided to take things into her own hands. Slipping out, she ran
down and, finding a servant, asked if he could get her a carriage.
It happened to be a hired waiter who knew nothing about the neigh-
borhood and Jo was looking round for help when Laurie, who had heard
what she said, came up and offered his grandfather's carriage, which
had just come for him, he said.

     "It's so early!  You can't mean to go yet?"  began Jo. looking
relieved but hesitating to accept the offer.

     "I always go early, I do, truly!  Please let me take you home.
It's all on my way, you know, and it rains, they say."

     That settled it, and telling him of Meg's mishap, Jo gratefully
accepted and rushed up to bring down the rest of the party.  Hannah
hated rain as much as a cat does so she made no trouble, and they
rolled away in the luxurious close carriage, feeling very festive
and elegant.  Laurie went on the box so Meg could keep her foot up,
and the girls talked over their party in freedom.

     "I had a capital time.  Did you?' asked Jo, rumpling up her
hair, and making herself comfortable.

     "Yes, till I hurt myself.  Sallie's friend, Annie Moffat, took
a fancy to me, and asked me to come and spend a week with her when
Sallie does.  She is going in the spring when the opera comes, and
it will be perfectly splendid, if Mother only lets me go," answered
Meg, cheering up at the thought.

     "I saw you dancing with the red headed man I ran away from.  Was
he nice?"

     "Oh. very!  His hair is auburn, not red, and he was very polite,
and I had a delicious redowa with him."

     "He looked like a grasshopper in a fit when he did the new step.
Laurie and I couldn't help laughing.  Did you hear us?"

     "No, but it was very rude.  What were you about all that time,
hidden away there?"

     Jo told her adventures, and by the time she had finished they
were at home.  With many thanks, they said good night and crept in,
hoping to disturb no one, but the instant their door creaked, two
little nightcaps bobbed up, and two sleepy but eager voices cried out . . .

     "Tell about the party!  Tell about the party!"

     With what Meg called `a great want of manners' Jo had saved some
bonbons for the little girls, and they soon subsided, after hearing
the most thrilling events of the evening.

     "I declare, it really seems like being a fine young lady, to
come home from the party in a carriage and sit in my dressing gown
wit a maid to wait on me," said Meg, as Jo bound up her foot with
arnica and brushed her hair.

     "I don't believe fine young ladies enjoy themselves a bit more
than we do, in spite of our burned hair, old gowns, one glove apiece
and tight slippers that sprain our ankles when we are silly enough
to wear them," And I think Jo was quite right.

                       CHAPTER 4

     "Oh,  dear,  how hard it does seem to take up our packs
and go on," sighed Meg the morning after the party, for  now
the holidays were over, the week of merrymaking  did not fit
her for going on easily with the task she never liked.

     "I wish it was Christmas or New Year's  all  the  time.
Wouldn't it be fun?"  answered Jo, yawning dismally.

     "We shouldn't enjoy ourselves half so much as we do now.
But it does seem so nice to have little suppers and bouquets,
and go to parties, and drive home, and read and rest,and not
work.  It's like other people, you know, and  I always  envy
girls who do  such things, I'm so fond of luxury," said Meg,
trying to decide which of two  shabby  gowns was  the  least
shabby.

     "Well, we can't have it, so don't let  us  grumble  but
shoulder  our bundles and trudge along as cheerfully as Mar-
mee does.  I'm sure Aunt March is a regular  Old Man of  the
Sea to me, but I suppose when I've learned to carry her with-
out complaining, she will tumble off, or get so light that I
shan't mind her."

      This  idea  tickled  Jo's  fancy  and  put her in good
spirits, but Meg didn't brighten, for her burden, consisting
of four spoiled children, seemed heavier than ever.  She had
not heart enough even to make herself  pretty  as  usual  by
putting on a blue neck ribbon and dressing her hair  in  the
most becoming way.

     "Where's the use of looking nice,  when no one sees  me
but those cross midgets, and no one cares whether I'm pretty
or not?" she muttered, shutting her drawer with a jerk.   "I
shall have to toil and moil all my days,  with  only  little
bits of fun now and then, and get old and ugly and sour, be-
cause  I'm poor and can't enjoy  my  life as other girls do.
It's a shame!"

     So Meg went down, wearing an injured look,and wasn't at
all agreeable at breakfast time.  Everyone seemed rather out
of sorts and inclined to croak.

     Beth had a headache and lay on the sofa, trying to com-
fort herself with the cat and three kittens.  Amy was frett-
ing because her lessons were not  learned,  and she couldn't
find her rubbers.  Jo would whistle and make a great  racket
getting ready.

     Mrs. March was very busy trying  to  finish  a  letter,
which must go at once, and Hannah  had the grumps, for being
up late didn't suit her.

     "There never was such a cross family!" cried Jo, losing
her temper when she had upset an  inkstand, broken both boot
lacings, and sat down upon her hat.

     "You're the crossest person in it!" returned Amy, wash-
ing out the sum that was all wrong with the  tears  that had
fallen on her slate.

     "Beth, if you don't keep these horrid cats down  cellar
I'll have them drowned," exclaimed Meg angrily as  she tried
to get rid of the kitten which had scrambled up her back and
stuck like a burr just out of reach.

     Jo laughed, Meg scolded, Beth implored, and Amy  wailed
because she couldn't remember how much nine times twelve was.

     "Girls, girls, do be quiet one minute!  I must get this
off by the early mail, and you drive me distracted with your
worry," cried Mrs. March, crossing out the third spoiled sen-
tence in her letter.

     There was a momentary lull, broken by Hannah, who stalk-
ed in, laid two hot turnovers on the table, and stalked  out
again.  These turnovers were an institution, and  the  girls
called them `muffs',for they had no others and found the hot
pies very comforting to their hands on cold mornings.

     Hannah never forgot to make them, no matter how busy or
grumpy she might be, for the walk  was long  and bleak.  The
poor things got no other lunch and were seldom  home  before
two.

     "Cuddle your cats and get over  your  headache,  Bethy.
Goodbye, Marmee.  We are a set of rascals this  morning, but
we'll come home regular angels.   Now  then, Meg!"   And  Jo
tramped away, feeling that the pilgrims were not setting out
as they ought to do.

     They always looked back before  turning the corner, for
their mother was always at the window to  nod and smile, and
wave her hand to them. Somehow it seemed as if they couldn't
have got through the day without that,  for whatever  their
mood might be, the last glimpse  of  that motherly  face was
sure to affect them like sunshine.

     "If Marmee shook her fist instead  of kissing her  hand
to us, it would serve us right, for more ungrateful wretches
than we are were never seen," cried Jo, taking a  remorseful
satisfaction in the snowy walk and bitter wind.

     "Don't use such dreadful expressions," replied Meg from
the depths of  the  veil  in which  she had shrouded herself
like a nun sick of the world.

     "I like good strong words that mean something," replied
Jo, catching her hat as it took a leap off her head prepara-
tory to flying away altogether.

     "Call yourself any names you like, but I am  neither  a
rascal nor a wretch and I don't choose to be called so."

     "You're a blighted being, and decidedly cross today be-
cause you can't sit in the lap of luxury all the time.  Poor
dear, just wait till I make my fortune, and  you shall revel
in carriages  and  ice cream  and high-heeled slippers,  and
posies, and red-headed boys to dance with."

     "How ridiculous you are, Jo!"  But Meg laughed  at  the
nonsense and felt better in spite of herself.

     "Lucky for you I am, for if I put on  crushed  airs and
tried to be dismal, as you do, we should be in a nice state.
Thank goodness, I can always find something funny to keep me
up.  Don't croak any more, but come  home  jolly,  there's a
dear."

     Jo gave her sister an encouraging pat on  the  shoulder
as they parted for the day, each going a different way, each
hugging her little warm  turnover,  and  each  trying to  be
cheerful in spite of wintry weather, hard work, and the  un-
satisfied desires of pleasure-loving youth.

     When Mr. March lost his property  in  trying to help an
unfortunate friend,the two oldest girls begged to be allowed
to do something toward their own support, at least.  Believ-
ing that they could not begin too early to cultivate energy,
industry,  and independence,  their parents  consented,  and
both fell to work with the hearty good will which  in  spite
of all obstacles is sure to succeed at last.

     Margaret found a place as nursery  governess  and  felt
rich with her small salary.  As she said,  she  was `fond of
luxury', and her chief  trouble was poverty.  She  found  it
harder to bear than the others because  she could remember a
time when home was beautiful,life full of ease and pleasure,
and want of any kind unknown.  She tried not  to  be envious
or discontented, but it was very natural that the young girl
should long for pretty things, gay friends, accomplishments,
and a happy life.  At the Kings' she daily saw all she want-
ed, for  the children's older sisters were just out, and Meg
caught frequent glimpses of dainty ball dresses and bouquets,
heard lively gossip about theaters, concerts, sleighing par-
ties, and merrymakings of all kinds, and saw money  lavished
on trifles which would have been  so precious to her.   Poor
Meg seldom complained,but a sense of injustice made her feel
bitter toward everyone sometimes,for she had not yet learned
to know how rich she was in the  blessings  which alone  can
make life happy.

     Jo happened to suit Aunt March, who was lame and needed
an active  person to wait upon her.  The  childless old lady
had offered to adopt one of the girls when the troubles came,
and was much offended because her offer was declined.  Other
friends told the Marches  that they  had lost all  chance of
being  remembered  in  the  rich  old  lady's will, but  the
unworldly Marches only said . . .

     "We can't give up our girls for a dozen fortunes.  Rich
or poor, we will keep together and be happy in one another."

     The old lady wouldn't speak to them for a time, but hap-
pening to meet Jo at at a friend's, something in her comical
face and blunt manners struck the old lady's fancy, and  she
proposed to take her for a companion.  This did  not suit Jo
at all, but she accepted the place since nothing better app-
eared and, to every one's surprise, got on  remarkably  well
with her irascible relative.  There was an occasional temp-
est, and once  Jo marched home, declaring she couldn't bear
it longer, but Aunt March always  cleared up  quickly,  and
sent for her to come back again with such urgency  that she
could not refuse, for in her heart  she  rather  liked  the
peppery old lady.

     I suspect that the real attraction was a large library
of fine books, which was left to  dust  and  spiders  since
Uncle March died. Jo remembered the kind old gentleman, who
used to let her build  railroads and bridges with  his  big
dictionaries, tell her stories about queer pictures  in his
Latin books, and buy her cards of gingerbread  whenever  he
met her in the street.  The dim, dusty room, with the busts
staring down from the tall bookcases, the cozy chairs,  the
globes, and best of all, the wilderness of books  in  which
she could wander where she liked, made the library a region
of bliss to her.

     The moment Aunt March took her nap, or was  busy  with
company, Jo hurried to this quiet place,and curling herself
up in the easy chair, devoured  poetry,  romance,  history,
travels, and pictures like a regular  bookworm.   But, like
all happiness, it did not last long, for as sure as she had
just reached the heart of the story, the sweetest  verse of
a song, or the most perilous adventure of her  traveler,  a
shrill voice called, "Josy-phine!  Josy-phine! and  she had
to leave her paradise to wind  yarn, wash  the  poodle,  or
read Belsham's Essays by the hour together.

     Jo's ambition  was to do something very splendid. What
it was, she had no idea as yet,but left it for time to tell
her, and meanwhile, found her  greatest affliction  in  the
fact that she couldn't read, run, and ride as  much as  she
liked.  A quick temper, sharp tongue, and  restless  spirit
were always getting  her into scrapes, and her  life was  a
series of ups and downs, which were both comic and pathetic.
But the training she received at Aunt March's was just what
she needed, and the thought that she was doing something to
support herself made her happy in  spite of  the  perpetual
"Josy-phine!"

     Beth was too bashful to go to school.It had been tried,
but she suffered so much that it was given up, and she  did
her lessons at home with her father. Even when he went away,
and her mother was called to devote her skill and energy to
Soldiers' Aid Societies, Beth went faithfully on by herself
and did the best she could.  She was a  housewifely  little
creature, and helped Hannah keep home neat and  comfortable
for the workers, never thinking of any  reward  but  to  be
loved. Long, quiet days she spent, not lonely nor idle, for
her little world was peopled with imaginary friends,and she
was by nature a busy bee.  There were six dolls to be taken
up  and  dressed  every morning, for Beth was a child still
and and loved her pets as well as ever.  Not  one whole  or
handsome one among them, all were outcasts till  Beth  took
them in, for when her sisters  outgrew  these  idols,  they
passed to her because Amy would have  nothing old  or ugly.
Beth cherished them all the  more tenderly  for  that  very
reason, and set up a hospital  for infirm  dolls.  No  pins
were ever stuck into their cotton vitals, no harsh words or
blows were ever given them, no  neglect  ever saddened  the
heart or the most repulsive, but all were fed and  clothed,
nursed and caressed with an affection which  never failed.
One forlorn fragment of dollanity had belonged to  Jo  and,
having led a tempestuous life, was left a wreck in the rag
bag, from which dreary poorhouse  it  was  rescued by Beth
and taken to her refuge.  Having no top to its  head,  she
tied on a neat little cap, and as both arms  and legs were
gone,she hid these deficiencies by folding it in a blanket
and devoting her best bed to this chronic invalid.  If any-
had known  the  care lavished  on that  dolly,  I think it
would have touched their hearts, even while  they laughed.
She brought it bits of bouquets, she read  to it, took  it
out to breathe fresh air, hidden under her coat, she sang
it lullabies and never went to be without kissing its dirty
face and whispering tenderly, "I hope you'll have a good
night, my poor dear."

     Beth had her troubles as well as the others, and not
being an angel but a very human little girl, she often `wept
a little weep' as Jo said, because she couldn't take music
lessons and have a fine piano.  She loved music so dearly,
tried so hard to learn, and practiced away so patiently at
the jingling old instrument, that it did seem as if someone
(not to hint Aunt March) ought to help her.  Nobody did,
however, and nobody saw Beth wipe the tears off the yellow
keys, that wouldn't  keep in tune, when she was all alone.
She sang like a little lark about her work, never was too
tired for Marmee and the girls, and day after day said
hopefully to herself, " I know I'll get my music some time,
if I'm good."

    There are many Beths in the world, shy and quiet, sitting
in corners till needed, and living for others so cheerfully
that no one sees the sacrifices till the little cricket on
the hearth stops chirping, and the sweet, sunshiny presence
vanishes, leaving silence and shadow behind.

     If anybody had asked Amy  what the greatest trial of her
life was, she would have answered at once, "My nose."  When
she was a baby,Jo had accidently dropped her into the coal hod,
and Amy insisted that the fall had ruined her nose forever. It
was not big nor red, like poor `Petrea's', it was only rather
flat, and all the pinching in the world could not give it an
aristocratic point.  No one minded it but herself, and it was
doing its best to grow, but Amy felt deeply the want of a
Grecian nose, and drew whole sheets of handsome ones to console
herself.

    "Little Raphael," as her sisters called  her, had a decided
talent for drawing, and was never so happy as when copying
flowers, designing fairies, or illustrating stories with queer
specimens of art.  Her  teachers complained that instead of
doing her sums she covered her slate with animals, the blank
pages of her atlas were used to copy maps on, and caricatures
of the most ludicrous description came fluttering out of all
her books at unlucky moments.  She got through her lessons as
well as she could, and managed to escape reprimands by being
a model of deportment.  She was a great favorite with her mates,
being good-tempered and possessing the happy art of pleasing
without effort.  Her little airs and graces were much admired,
so were her accomplishments, for besides her drawing, she could
play twelve tunes, crochet, and read French without mispronounc-
ing more than two-thirds of the words.  She had a plaintive
way of saying, "When Papa was rich we did so-and-so," which
was very touching, and her long words were considered `perfectly
elegant' by the girls.
     Amy was in a fair way to be spoiled, for everyone petted
her, and her small vanities and selfishnesses were growing nicely.
One thing, however, rather quenched the vanities. She had to wear
her cousin's clothes.  Now Florence's mama hadn't a particle of
taste, and Amy suffered deeply at having to wear a red instead of
a blue bonnet, unbecoming gowns, and fussy aprons that did not
fit.  Everything was good, well made, and little worn, but Amy's
artistic eyes were much afflicted, especially this winter, when
her school dress was a dull purple with yellow dots and no
trimming.

     "My only comfort," she said to Meg, with tears in her eyes,
"is that Mother doesn't take tucks in my dresses whenever I'm
naughty, as Maria Parks's mother does.  My dear, it's really
dreadful, for sometimes she is so bad her frock is up to her
knees, and she can't come to school.  When I think of this
deggerredation, I fell that I can bear even my flat nose and
purple gown with yellow skyrockets on it."

     Meg was Amy's confidante and monitor, and by some strange
attraction of opposites Jo was gentle Beth's.  To Jo alone did
the shy child tell her thoughts, and over her big harum-scarum
sister Beth unconsciously exercised more influence than anyone
in the family. The two older girls were a great deal to one
another, but each took one of the younger sisters into her
keeping and watched over her in her own way, `playing mother'
they called it, and put their sisters in the places of
discarded dolls with the maternal instinct of litte women.

     "Has anybody got anything to tell?  It's been such a dismal
day I'm really dying for some amusement," said Meg, as they sat
sewing together that evening.

     "I had a queer time with Aunt today, and, as I got the best
of it,I'll tell you about it," began Jo, who dearly loved to tell
stories.  "I was reading that everlasting Belsham, and droning
away as I always do, for Aunt soon drops off, and then I take out
some nice book, and read like fury till she wakes up.  I actually
made myself sleepy, and before she began to nod, I gave such a
gape that she asked me what I meant by opening my mouth wide
enough to take the whole book in at once.

     "I wish I could, and be done with it," said I, trying not to
be saucy.

     "Then she gave me a long lecture on my sins, and told me to
sit and think them over while she just `lost' herself for a moment.
She never finds herself very soon, so the minute her cap began to
bob like a top-heavy dahlia, I whipped the VICAR OF WAKEFIELD out
of my pocket, and read away, with one eye on him and one on Aunt.
I'd just got to where they all tumbled into the water when I
forgot and laughed out loud.  Aunt woke up and, being more
good-natured after her nap, told me to read a bit and show what
frivolous work I preferred to the worthy and instructive Belsham.
I did my very best, and she liked it, though she only said . . .

     "I don't understand what it's all about.  Go back and begin
it, child."

     "Back I went, and made the Primroses as interesting as ever I
could.  Once I was wicked enough to stop in a thrilling place, and
say meekly, "I'm afraid it tires you, ma'am.  Shan't I stop now?"

     "She caught up her knitting, which had dropped out of her
hands, gave me a sharp look through her specs, and said, in her
short way, `Finish the chapter, and don't be impertinent, miss'."

     "Did she own she liked it?" asked Meg.

     "Oh, bless you, no!  But she let old Belsham rest, and when I
ran back after my gloves this afternoon, there she was, so hard at
the Vicar that she didn't hear me laugh as I danced a jig in the hall
because of the good time coming. What a pleasant life she might have
if only she chose!  I don't envy her much, in spite of her money, for
after all rich people have about as many worries as poor ones, I
think," added Jo.

     "That reminds me," said Meg, "that I've got something to tell.
It isn't funny, like Jo's story, but I thought about it a good deal
as I came home.  At the Kings' today I found everybody in a flurry,
and one of the children said that her oldest brother had done some-
thing dreadful, and Papa had sent him away.  I heard Mrs. King
crying and Mr. King talking very loud, and Grace and Ellen turned
away their faces when they passed me, so I shouldn't see how red and
swollen their eyes were.  I didn't ask any questions, of course, but
I felt so sorry for them and was rather glad I hadn't any wild
brothers to do wicked things and disgrace the family."

     "I think being disgraced in school is a great deal tryinger
than anything bad boys can do," said Amy, shaking her head, as if
her experience of life had been a deep one.  "Susie Perkins came
to school today with a lovely red carnelian ring.  I wanted it
dreadfully, and wished I was her with all my might.  Well, she
drew a picture of Mr. Davis, with a monstrous nose and a hump,
and the words, `Young ladies, my eye is upon you!' coming out of
his mouth in a balloon thing. We were laughing over it when all
of a sudden his eye was on us, and he ordered Susie to bring up
her slate.  She was parrylized with fright, but she went, and oh,
what do you think he did?  He took her by the ear--the ear!  Just
fancy how horrid!--and led her to the recitation platform, and
made her stand there half and hour, holding the slate so everyone
could see."

     "Didn't the girls laugh at the picture?" asked Jo, who
relished the scrape.

     "Laugh? Not one! They sat still as mice, and Susie cried
quarts, I know she did.  I didn't envy her then, for I felt that
millions of carnelian rings wouldn't have made me happy after that.
I never, never should have got over such a agonizing mortification."
And Amy went on with her work, in the proud consciousness of virtue
and the successful utterance of two long words in a breath.

     "I saw something I liked this morning, and I meant to tell it
at dinner, but I forgot," said Beth, putting Jo's topsy-turvy basket
in order as she talked.  "When I went to get some oysters for Hannah,
Mr. Laurence was in the fish shop, but he didn't see me, for I kept
behind the fish barrel, and he was busy with Mr. Cutter the fishman.
A poor woman came in with a pail a mop, and asked Mr. Cutter if he
would let her do some scrubbing for a bit of fish, because she
hadn't any dinner for her children, and had been disappointed of a
day's work.  Mr. Cutter was in a hurry and said `No', rather
crossly, so she was going away, looking hungry and sorry, when Mr.
Laurence hooked up a big fish with the crooked end of his cane and
held it out to her.  She was so glad and surprised she took it
right into her arms, and thanked him over and over.  He told her to
`go along and cook it', and she hurried off, so happy!  Wasn't it
good of him?  Oh, she did look so funny, hugging the big, slippery
fish, and hoping Mr. Laurence's bed in heaven would be `aisy'."

     When they had laughed at Beth's story, they asked their mother
for one, and after a moments thought, she said soberly, "As I sat
cutting out blue flannel jackets today at the rooms, I felt very
anxious about Father, and thought how lonely and helpless we should
be , if anything happened to him.  It was not a wise thing to do,
but I kept on worrying till an old man came in with an order for some
clothes.  He sat down near me, and I began to talk to him, for he
looked poor and tired and anxious.

     "`Have you sons in the army?' I asked,for the note he brought
was not to me.
     "Yes, ma'am. I had four, but two were killed, one is a prisoner,
and I'm going to the other, who is very sick in a Washington hospital.'
he answered quietly.

     "`You have done a great deal for your country, sir,' I said,
feeling respect now, instead of pity.

     "`Not a mite more than I ought, ma'am.  I'd go myself, if I was
any use.  As I ain't, I give my boys, and give 'em free.'

     "He spoke so cheerfully, looked so sincere, and seemed so glad
to give his all, that I was ashamed of myself.  I'd given one man and
thought it too much, while he gave four without grudging them. I had
all my girls to comfort me at home, and his last son was waiting,
miles away, to say good-by to him, perhaps!  I felt so rich, so happy
thinking of my blessings, that I made him a nice bundle, gave him
some money, and thanked him heartily for the lesson he had taught me."

     "Tell another story, Mother, one with a moral to it, like this.
I like to think about them afterward, if they are real and not too
preachy," said Jo, after a minute's silence.

     Mrs. March smiled and began at once, for she had told stories to
this little audience for many years, and knew how to please them.

     "Once upon a time, there were four girls, who had enough to eat
and drink and wear, a good many comforts and pleasures, kind friends
and parents who loved them dearly, and yet they were not contented."
(Here the listeners stole sly looks at one another, and began to sew diligently.) "These girls were anxious to be good and made many
excellent resolutions, but they did not keep them very well, and were
constantly saying, `If only we had this,' or `If we could only do
that,' quite forgetting how much they already had, and how many
things they actually could do.  So they asked an old woman what spell
they could use to make them happy, and she said, `When you feel
discontented, think over your blessings, and be grateful.'" (Here Jo
looked up quickly, as if about to speak, but changed her mind, seeing
that the story was not done yet.)

     "Being sensible girls, they decided to try her advice, and soon
were surprised to see how well off they were.  One discovered that
money couldn't keep shame and sorrow out of rich people's houses,
another that, though she was poor, she was a great deal happier, with
her youth, health, and good spirits, than a certain fretful, feeble
old lady who couldn't enjoy her comforts, a third that, disagreeable
as it was to help get dinner, it was harder still to go begging for
it and the fourth, that even carnelian rings were not so valuable as
good behavior.  So they agreed to stop complaining, to enjoy the
blessings already possessed, and try to deserve them, lest they
should be taken away entirely, instead of increased, and I believe
they were never disappointed or sorry that they took the old woman's
advice."

     "Now, Marmee, that is very cunning of you to turn our own
stories against us, and give us a sermon instead of a romance!"
cried Meg.

     "I like that kind of sermon.  It's the sort Father used to tell
us," said Beth thoughtfully, putting the needles straight on Jo's
cushion.

     "I don't complain near as much as the others do, and I shall be
more careful than ever now, for I've had warning from Susies's down-
fall," said Amy morally.

     "We needed that lesson, and we won't forget it.  If we do so,
you just say to us, as old Chloe did in UNCLE TOM, `Tink ob yer
marcies, chillen! `Tink ob yer marcies!'" added Jo, who could not,
for the life of her, help getting a morsel of fun out of the little
sermon, though she took it to heart as much as any of them.


                       CHAPTER FIVE

     "What in the world are you going to do now, Jo." asked
Meg one snowy afternoon,as her sister came tramping through
the hall, in rubber boots, old sack, and hood, with a broom
in one hand and a shovel in the other.

     "Going out for exercise," answered Jo with a  mischie-
vous twinkle in her eyes.

     "I should think two long walks this morning would have
been enough!  It's  cold and  dull out, and I advise you to
stay warm and dry by the fire, as I do," said Meg with a
shiver.

     "Never take advice!  Can't keep still all day, and not
being a pussycat, I don't like to doze by the fire.  I like
adventures, and I'm going to find some."

     Meg went back to toast her feet and read IVANHOE, and Jo
began to dig paths with great energy. The snow was light, and
with her broom she soon swept a path all round the garden, for
Beth to walk in when the sun came out and the invalid dolls
needed air.  Now, the garden separated the Marches' house from
that of Mr. Laurence. Both stood in a suburb of the city, which
was still countrylike, with groves and lawns, large gardens, and
quiet streets.  A low hedge parted the two estates.  On one side
was an old, brown house, looking rather bare and shabby, robbed
of the vines that in summer covered its walls and the flowers,
which then surrounded it.  On the other side was a stately stone
mansion, plainly betokening every sort of comfort and luxury, from
the big coach house and well-kept grounds to the conservatory and
the glimpses of lovely things one caught between the rich curtains.

     Yet it seemed a lonely, lifeless sort of house, for no children
frolicked on the lawn, no motherly face ever smiled at the windows,
and few people went in and out, except the old gentleman and his
grandson.

     To Jo's lively fancy, this fine house seemed a kind of enchanted
palace, full of splendors and delights which no one enjoyed.  She
had long wanted to behold these hidden glories, and to know the
Laurence boy, who looked as if he would like to be known, if he only
knew how to begin.  Since the party, she had been more eager than ever,
and had planned many ways of making friends with him, but he had not
been seen lately, and Jo began to think he had gone away, when she
one day spied a brown face at an upper window, looking wistfully down
into their garden, where Beth and Amy were snow-balling one another.

     "That boy is suffering for society and fun," she said to herself.
"His grandpa does not know what's good for him, and keeps him shut up
all alone.  He needs a party of jolly boys to play with, or somebody
young and lively.  I've a great mind to go over and tell the old
gentleman so!"

     The idea amused Jo. who liked to do daring things and was
always scandalizing Meg by her queer performances. The plan of
`going over' was not forgotten.  And when the snowy afternoon came,
Jo resolved to try what could be done. She saw Mr. Lawrence drive off,
and then sallied out to dig her way down to the hedge, where she
paused and took a survey.  All quiet, curtains down at the lower win-
dows, servants out of sight, and nothing human visible but a curly
black head leaning on a thin hand at the upper window.

     "There he is," thought Jo, "Poor boy!  All alone and sick this
dismal day.  It's a shame!  I'll toss up a snowball and make him look
out, and then say a kind word to him."

     Up went a handful of soft snow, and the head turned at once,
showing a face which lost its listless look in a minute, as the big
eyes brightened and the mouth began to smile. Jo nodded and laughed,
and flourished her broom as she called out . . .

     "How do you do?  Are you sick?"

     Laurie opened the window, and croaked out as hoarsely as a raven . . .

     "Better, thank you.  I've had a bad cold, and been shut up a
week."

     "I'm sorry.  What do you amuse yourself with?"

     "Nothing.  It's dull as tombs up here."

     "Don't you read?"

     "Not much.  They won't let me."

     "Can't somebody read to you?"

     "Grandpa does sometimes, but my books don't interest him, and
I hate to ask Brooke all the time."

     "Have someone come and see you then."

     "There isn't anyone I'd like to see.  Boys make such a row, and
my head is weak."

     "Isn't there some nice girl who'd read and amuse you?  Girls
are quiet and like to play nurse."

     "Don't know any."

     "You know us," began Jo, then laughed and stopped.

     "So I do!  Will you come, please?" cried Laurie.

     "I'm not quiet and nice, but I'll come, if Mother will let me.
I'll go ask her.  Shut the window, like a good boy, and wait till I
come."

     With that, Jo shouldered her broom and marched into the house,
wondering what they would all say to her.  Laurie was in a flutter
of excitement at the idea of having company, and flew about to get
ready, for as Mrs. March said, he was `a little gentleman'. and did
honor to the coming guest by brushing his curly pate, putting on a
fresh color, and trying tidy up the room, which in spite of half a
dozen servants, was anything but neat.  Presently there came a loud
ring, than a decided voice, asking for `Mr. laurie', and a surprised-
looking servant came running up to announce a young lady.

     "All right, show her up, it's Miss Jo,"said Laurie, going to the
door of his little parlor to meet Jo, who appeared, looking rosy and
quite at her ease, with a covered dish in one hand and Beth's three
kittens in the other.

     "Here I am, bag and baggage," she said briskly. "Mother sent her
love, and was glad if I could do anything for you.  Meg wanted me to
bring some of her blancmange, she makes it very nicely, and Beth thought
her cats would be comforting.  I knew you'd laugh at them, but I couldn't
refuse, she was so anxious to do something."

     It so happened that Beth's funny loan was just the thing, for
in laughing over the kits, Laurie forgot his bashfulness, and grew
sociable at once.

     "That looks too pretty to eat," he said, smiling with pleasure,
as Jo uncovered the dish, and showed the blancmange, surrounded by a
garland of green leaves, and the scarlet flowers of Amy's pet geranium.

     "It isn't anything, only they all felt kindly and wanted to show
it.  Tell the girl to put it away for your tea.  It's so simple you can
eat it, and being soft, it will slip down without hurting your sore
throat. What a cozy room this is!"

     "It might be it it was kept nice, but the maids are lazy,and
I don't know how to make them mind. It worries me though."

     "I'll right it up in two minutes, for it only needs to have the
hearth brushed, so--and the things made straight on the mantelpiece,
so--and the books put here, and the bottles there, and your sofa
turned from the light, and the pillows plumped up a bit.  Now then,
you're fixed."

     And so he was, for, as she laughed and talked, Jo had whisked
things into place and given quite a different air to the room. Laurie
watched her in respectful silence, and when she beckoned him to his
sofa, he sat down with a sigh of satisfaction, saying gratefully . . .

     "How kind you are!  Yes, that's what it wanted. Now please take
the big chair and let me do something to amuse my company."

     "No, I came to amuse you.  Shall I read aloud?" and Jo looked
affectionately toward some inviting books near by.

     "Thank you!  I've read all those, and if you don't mind, I'd
rather talk," answered Laurie.

     "Not a bit.  I'll talk all day if you'll only set me going.
Beth says I never know when to stop."

     "Is Beth the rosy one, who stays at home good deal and some-
times goes out with a little basket?" asked Laurie with interest.

     "Yes, that's Beth.  She's my girl, and a regular good one she
is, too."

     "The pretty one is Meg, and the curly-haired one is Amy, I be-
lieve?"

     Laurie colored up, but answered frankly, "Why, you see I often
hear you calling to one another, and when I'm alone up here, I can't
help looking over at your house, you always seem to be having such
good times.  I beg your pardon for being so rude, but sometimes you
forget to put down the curtain at the window where the flowers are.
And when the lamps are lighted, it's like looking at a picture to
see the fire, and you all around the table with your mother.  Her
face is right opposite, and it looks so sweet behind the flowers,
I can't help watching it.  I haven't got any mother, you know."
And Laurie poked the fire to hide a little twitching of the lips
that he could not control.

     The solitary, hungry look in his eyes went straight to Jo's
warm heart.  she had been so simply taught that there was no
nonsense in her head, and at fifteen she was as innocent and frank
as any child.  Laurie was sick and lonely, and feeling how rich she
was in home and happiness, she gladly tried to share it with him.
Her face was very friendly and her sharp voice unusually gentle as
she said . . .

     "We'll never draw that curtain any more, and I give you leave
to look as much as you like.  I just wish, though, instead of peeping,
you'd come over and see us.  Mother is so splendid, she'd do you heaps
of good, and Beth would sing to you if I begged her to, and Amy would
dance.  Meg and I would make you laugh over our funny stage
properties, and we'd have jolly times. Wouldn't your grandpa let you?"

     "I think he would, if your mother asked him.  He's very kind,
though he does not look so, and he lets me do what I like, pretty much,
only he's afraid I might be a bother to strangers," began Laurie,
brightening more and more.

     "We are not strangers, we are neighbors, and you needn't think
you'd be a bother. We want to know you, and I've been trying to do
it this ever so long.  We haven't been here a great while, you know,
but we have got acquainted with all our neighbors but you."

     "You see, Grandpa lives among his books, and doesn't mind much
what happens outside.  Mr. Brooke, my tutor, doesn't stay here, you
know, and I have no one to go about with me, so I just stop at home
and get on as I can."

     "That's bad.  You ought to make an effort and go visiting
everywhere you are asked, then you'll have plenty of friends, and
pleasant places to go to.  Never mind being bashful. It won't last
long if you keep going."

     Laurie turned red again, but wasn't offended at being accused
of bashfulness, for there was so much good will in Jo it was
impossible not to take her blunt speeches as kindly as they were
meant.

     "Do you like your school?" asked the boy, changing the subject,
after a little pause, during which he stared at the fire and Jo
looked about her, well pleased.

     "Don't go to school, I'm a businessman--girl, I mean. I go to
wait on my great-aunt, and a dear, cross old soul she is, too,"
answered Jo.

     Laurie opened his mouth to ask another question, but remembering
just in time that it wasn't manners to make too many inquiries into
people's affairs, he shut it again, and looked uncomfortable.

     Jo liked his good breeding, and didn't mind having a laugh at
Aunt March, so she gave him a lively description of the fidgety
old lady, her fat poodle, the parrot that talked Spanish, and the
library where she reveled.

     Laurie enjoyed that immensely, and when she told about the
prim old gentleman who came once to woo Aunt March, and in the
middle of a fine speech, how Poll had tweaked his wig off to his
great dismay, the boy lay back and laughed till the tears ran
down his cheeks, and a maid popped her head in to see what was
the matter.

     "Oh!  That does me no end of good.  Tell on, please," he
said, taking his face out of the sofa cushion, red and shining
with merriment.

     Much elated with her success, Jo did `tell on', all about
their plays and plans, their hopes and fears for Father, and
the most interesting events of the little world in which the
sisters lived.  Then they got to talking about books, and to
Jo's delight, she found that Laurie loved them as well as she
did, and had read even more than herself.

     "If you like them so much, come down and see ours.  Grand-
father is out, so you needn't be afraid," said Laurie, getting
up.

     "I'm not afraid of anything," returned Jo, with a toss of
the head.

     "I don't believe you are!" exclaimed the boy, looking at her
with much admiration, though he privately thought she would have
good reason to be a trifle afraid of the old gentleman, if she
met hem in some of his moods.

     The atmosphere of the whole house being summerlike, Laurie
led the way from room to room, letting Jo stop to examine what-
ever struck her fancy. And so, at last they came to the library,
where she clapped her hands and pranced, as she always did when
especially delighted.  It was lined with books, and there were
pictures and statues, and distracting little cabinets full of
coins and curiosities, and Sleepy  Hollow chairs, and queer tables,
and bronzes, and best of all, a great open fireplace with quaint
tiles all round it.

     "What richness!"  sighed Jo, sinking into the depth of a
velour chair and gazing about her with an air of intense satis-
faction.  "Theodore Laurence, you ought to be the happiest boy in
the world," she added impressively.

     "A fellow can't live on books," said Laurie, shaking his head
as he perched on a table opposite.

     Before he could more, a bell rang, and Jo flew up, exclaiming
with alarm, "Mercy me!  It's your grandpa!"

     "Well, what if it is?  You are not afraid of anything, you
know," returned the boy, looking wicked.

     "I think I am a little bit afraid of him, but I don't know
why I should be.  Marmee said I might come, and I don't think
you're any the worse for it," said Jo, composing herself, though
she kept her eyes on the door.

     "I'm a great deal better for it, and ever so much obliged.
I'm only afraid you are very tired of talking to me.  It was so
pleasant, I couldn't bear to stop," said Laurie gratefully.

     "The doctor to see you, sir," and the maid beckoned as she
spoke.

     "Would you mind if I left you for a minute?  I suppose I
must see him," said Laurie.

     "Don't mind me.  I'm happy as a cricket here," answered Jo.

     Laurie went away, and his guest amused herself in her own way.
She was standing before a fine portrait of the old gentleman when
the door opened again, and without turning, she said decidedly, "I'm
sure now that I shouldn't be afraid of him, for he's got kind eyes,
though his mouth is grim, and he looks as if he had a tremendous will
of his own.  He isn't as handsome as my grandfather, but I like him."

     "Thank you, ma'am," said a gruff voice behind her, and there,
to her great dismay, stood old Mr. Laurence.

     Poor Jo blushed till she couldn't blush any redder, and her
heart began to beat uncomfortably fast as she thought what she had
said. For a minute a wild desire to run away possessed her, but
that was cowardly, and the girls would laugh at her, so she resolved
to stay and get out of the scrape as she could.  A second look showed
her that the living eyes, under the bushy eyebrows, were kinder even
than the painted ones, and there was a sly twinkle in them, which
lessened her fear a good deal.  The gruff voice was gruffer than ever,
as the old gentleman said abruptly, after the dreadful pause, "So
you're not afraid of me, hey?"

     "Not much, sir."

     "And you don't think me as handsome as your grandfather?"

     "Not quite, sir."

     "And I've got a tremendous will, have I?"

     "I only said I thought so."

     "But you like me in spite of it?"

     "Yes, I do, sir."

     That answer pleased the old gentleman. He gave a short laugh,
shook hands with her, and, putting his finger under her chin, turned
up her face, examined it gravely, and let it go, saying with a nod,
"You've got your grandfather's spirit, if you haven't his face.  He
was a fine man, my dear, but what is better, he was a brave and an
honest one, and I was proud to be his friend."

     "Thank you, sir,"  And Jo was quite comfortable after that, for
it suited her exactly.

     "What have you been doing to this boy of mine, hey?" was the
next question, sharply put.

     "Only trying to be neighborly, sir."  And Jo to how her visit
came about.

     "You think he needs cheering up a bit, do you?"

     "Yes, sir, he seems a little lonely, and young folks would do
him good perhaps.  We are only girls, but we should be glad to
help if we could, for we don't forget the splendid Christmas present
you sent us," said Jo eagerly.

     "Tut, tut, tut!  That was the boy's affair. How is the poor
woman?"

     "Doing nicely, sir."  And off went Jo, talking very fast, as
she told all about the Hummels, in whom her mother had interested
richer friends than they were.

     "Just her father's way of doing good.  I shall come and see
your mother some fine day.  Tell her so.  There's the tea bell,
we have it early on the boy's account.  Come down and go on being
neighborly."

     "If you'd like to have me, sir."

     "Shouldn't ask you, if I didn't."  And Mr. Laurence offered
her his arm with old-fashioned courtesy.

     "What would Meg say to this?"  thought Jo, as she was marched
away, while her eyes danced with fun as she imagined herself telling
the story at home.

     "Hey!  Why, what the dickens has come to the fellow?"  said the
old gentleman, as Laurie came running downstairs and brought up with
a start of surprise at the astounding sight of Jo arm in arm  with
his redoubtable grandfather.

     "I didn't know you'd come, sir," he began, as Jo gave him a
triumphant little glance.

     "That's evident, by the way you racket downstairs.  Come to
your tea, sir, and behave like a gentleman."  And having pulled
the boy's hair by way of a caress, Mr. Laurence walked on, while
Laurie went through a series of comic evolutions behind their
backs, which nearly produced an explosion of laughter from Jo.

     The old gentleman did not say much as he drank his four
cups of tea, but he watched the young people, who soon chatted
away like old friends, and the change in his grandson did not
escape him.  There was color, light, and life in the boy's face
now, vivacity in his manner, and genuine merriment in his laugh.

     "She's right, the lad is lonely.  I'll see what these little
girls can do for him," thought Mr. Laurence, as he looked and
listened.  He liked Jo, for her odd, blunt ways suited him, and
she seemed to understand the boy almost as well as if she had
been one herself.

     If the Laurences had been what Jo called `prim and poky',
she would not have got on at all, for such people always made
her shy and awkward. But finding them free and easy, she was
so herself, and made a good impression.  When they rose she
proposed to go, but Laurie said he had something more to show
her, and took her away to the conservatory, which had been
lighted for her benefit.  It seemed quite fairylike to Jo, as
she went up and down the walks, enjoying the blooming walls on
either side, the soft light, the damp sweet air, and the wonderful
vines and trees that hung about her, while her new friend cut the
finest flowers till his hands were full. Then he tied them up,
saying, with the happy look Jo liked to see, "Please give these
to your mother, and tell her I like the medicine she sent me very
much."

     They found Mr. Laurence standing before the fire in the great
drawing room, by Jo's attention was entirely absorbed by a grand
piano, which stood open.

     "Do you play?"  she asked, turning to Laurie with a respectful
expression.

     "Sometimes," he answered modestly.

     "Please do now.  I want to hear it, so I can tell Beth."

     "Won't you first?"

     "Don't know how.  Too stupid to learn, but I love music dearly."

     So Laurie played and Jo listened, with her nose luxuriously
buried in heliotrope and tea roses.  Her respect and regard for
the `Laurence' boy increased very much, for he played remarkably well
and didn't put on any  airs.  She wished Beth could hear him, but
she did not say so, only praised him till he was quite abashed, and
his grandfather came to his rescue.

     "That will do, that will do, young lady.  too many sugarplums
are not good for him.  His music isn't bad, but I hope he will do
as well in more important things.  Going?  well, I'm much obliged
to you, and I hope you'll come again.  My respects to your mother.
Good night, Doctor Jo."

     He shook hands kindly, but looked as if something did not
please him.  When they got into the hall, Jo asked Laurie if she
had said something amiss.  He shook his head.

     "No, it was me.  He doesn't like to hear me play."

     "Why not?"

     "I'll tell you some day.  John is going home with you, as I
can't."

     "No need of that.  I am not a young lady, and it's only a
step.  Take care of yourself, won't you?"

     "Yes, but you will come again, I hope?"

     "If you promise to come and see us after you are well."

     "I will."

     "Good night, Laurie!"

     "Good night, Jo, good night!"

     When all the afternoon's adventures had been told, the family
felt inclined to go visiting in a body, for each found something
very attractive in the big house on the other side of the hedge.
Mrs. March wanted to talk of her father with the old man who had
not forgotten him, Meg longed to walk in the conservatory, Beth
sighed for the grand piano. and Amy was eager to see the fine
pictures and statues.

     "Mother, why didn't Mr. Laurence like to have Laurie play?"
asked Jo, who was of an inquiring disposition.

     "I am not sure, but I think it was because his son, Laurie's
father, married an Italian lady, a musician, which displeased the
old man, who is very proud.  The lady was good and lovely and
accomplished, but he did not like her, and never saw his son after
he married.  They both died when Laurie was a little child, and
then his grandfather took him home.  I fancy the boy, who was born
in Italy, is not very strong, and the old man is afraid of losing
him, which makes him so careful.  Laurie comes naturally by his
love of music, for he is like his mother, and I dare say his grand-
father fears that he may want to be a musician.  At any rate, his
skill reminds him of the woman he did not like, and so he `glowered'
as Jo said."

     "Dear me, how romantic!"  exclaimed Meg.

     "How silly!" said Jo.  "Let him be a musician if he wants to,
and not plague his life out sending him to college, when he hates
to go."

     "That's why he has such handsome black eyes and pretty manners,
I suppose. Italians are always nice, " said Meg, who was a little
sentimental.

     "What do you know about his eyes and his manners?  You never
spoke to him, hardly," cried Jo, who was not sentimental.

     "I saw him at the party, and what you tell shows that he knows
how to behave.  That was a nice little speech about the medicine
Mother sent him."

     "He meant the blanc mange, I suppose."

     "How stupid you are, child!  He meant you, of course."

     "Did he?"  And Jo opened her eyes as if it had never occurred
to her before.

     "I never saw such a girl!  You don't know a compliment when
you get it," said Meg, with the air of a young lady who knew all
about the matter.

     "I think they are great nonsense, and I'll thank you not to
be silly and spoil my fun.  Laurie's a nice boy and I like him,
and I won't have any sentimental stuff about compliments and such
rubbish.  We'll all be good to him because he hasn't got any mother,
and he may come over and see us, mayn't he, Marmee?"

     "Yes, Jo, your little friend is very welcome, and I hope Meg
will remember that children should be children as long as they can."

     "I don't call myself a child, and I'm not in my teens yet,"
observed Amy.  "What do you say, Beth?"

     "I was thinking about our `PILGRIM'S PROGRESS'," answered Beth,
who had not heard a word.  "How we got out of the Slough and through
the Wicket Gate by resolving to be good, and up the steep hill by
trying, and that maybe the house over there, full of splendid things,
is going to be our Palace Beautiful."

     "We have got to get by the lions first," said Jo, as if she
rather liked the prospect.


                      CHAPTER SIX

     The big house did prove a Palace Beautiful, though it took
some time for all to get in, and Beth found it very hard to pass
the lions.  Old Mr. Laurence was the biggest one, but after he
had called, said something funny or kind to each one of the girls,
and talked over old times with their mother, nobody felt much
afraid of him, except timid Beth. The other lion was the fact that
they were poor and Laurie rich, for this made them shy of accepting
favors which they could not return.  But, after a while, they found
that he considered them the benefactors, and could not do enough to
show how grateful he was for Mrs. March's motherly welcome, their
cheerful society, and the comfort he took in that humble home of
theirs.  So they soon forgot their pride and interchanged kindnesses
without stopping to think which was the greater.

     All sorts of pleasant things happened about that time, for the
new friendship flourished like grass in spring.  Every one liked
Laurie, and he privately informed his tutor that "the Marches were
regularly splendid girls."  With the delightful enthusiasm of youth,
they took the solitary boy into their midst and made much of him,
and he found something very charming in the innocent companionship
of these simple-hearted girls. Never having known mother or sisters,
he was quick to feel the influences they brought about him, and
their busy, lively ways made him ashamed of the indolent life he led.
He was tired of books, and found people so interesting now that Mr.
Brooke was obliged to make very unsatisfactory reports, for Laurie
was always playing truant and running over to the Marches'.

     "Never mind, let him take a holiday, and make it up afterward,"
said the old gentleman.  "The good lady next door says he is studying
too hard and needs young society, amusement, and exercise.  I suspect
she is  right, and that I've been coddling the fellow as if I'd been
his grandmother. Let him do what he likes, as long as he is happy.
He can't get into mischief in that little nunnery over there, and
Mrs. March is doing more for him than we can."

     What good times they had, to be sure.  Such plays and tableaux,
such sleigh rides and skating frolics, such pleasant evenings in
the old parlor, and now and then such gay little parties at the
great house.  Meg could walk in the conservatory whenever she liked
and revel in bouquets, Jo browsed over the new library voraciously,
and convulsed the old gentleman with her criticisms, Amy copied
pictures and enjoyed beauty to her heart's content, and Laurie
played `lord of the manor' in the most delightful style.

     But Beth, though yearning for the grand piano, could not
pluck up courage to go to the `Mansion of Bliss', as Meg called
it.  She went once with Jo, but the old gentleman, not being
aware of her infirmity, stared at her so hard from under his
heavy eyebrows, and said "Hey!" so loud, that he frightened her
so much her `feet chattered on the floor', she never told her
mother, and she ran away, declaring she would never go there
any more, not even for the dear piano.  No persuasions or entice-
ments could overcome her fear, till, the fact coming to Mr.
Laurence's ear in some mysterious way, he set about mending
matters.  During one of the brief calls he made, he artfully
led the conversation to music, and talked away about great
singers whom he had seen, fine organs he had heard, and told
such charming anecdotes that Beth found it impossible to stay
in her distant corner, but crept nearer and nearer, as if
fascinated.  At the back of his chair she stopped and stood
listening, with her great eyes wide open and her cheeks red
with excitement of this unusual performance.  Taking no more
notice of her than if she had been a fly, Mr. Laurence talked on
about Laurie's lessons and teachers.  And presently, as if the
idea had just occurred to him, he said to Mrs. March . . .

     "The boy neglects his music now, and I'm glad of it, for
he was getting too fond of it.  But the piano suffers for want
of use.  Wouldn't some of your girls like to run over, and
practice on it now and then, just to keep it in tune, you know,
ma`am?"

     Beth took a step forward, and pressed her hands tightly
together to keep from clapping them, for this was an irresistible
temptation, and the thought of practicing on that splendid
instrument quite took her breath away.  Before Mrs. March could
reply, Mr. Laurence went on with an odd little nod and smile. . .

     "They needn't see or speak to anyone, but run in at any time.
For I'm shut up in my study at the other end of the house, Laurie
is out a great deal, and the servants are never near the drawing
room after nine o'clock."

     Here he rose, as if going, and Beth made up her mind to speak,
for that last arrangement left nothing to be desired.  "Please, tell
the young ladies what I say, and if they don't care to come, why,
never mind."  Here a little hand slipped into his, and Beth looked
up at him with a face full of gratitude, as she said, in her earnest
yet timid way . . .

     "Oh sir, they do care, very very much!"

     "Are you the musical girl?"  he asked, without any startling
"Hey!" as he looked down at  her very kindly.

     "I'm Beth.  I love it dearly, and I'll come, if you are quite
sure nobody will hear me, and be disturbed," she added, fearing to
be rude, and trembling at her own boldness as she spoke.

     "Not a soul, my dear.  The house is empty half the day, so
come and drum away as much as you like, and I shall be obliged to
you."

     "How kind you are, sir!"

     Beth blushed like a rose under the friendly look he wore, but
she was not frightened now, and gave the hand a grateful squeeze
because she had no words to thank him for the precious gift he had
given her.  The old gentleman softly stroked the hair off her fore-
head, and, stooping down, he kissed herr, saying, in a tone few
people ever heard . . .

     "I had a little girl once, with eyes like these.  God bless you,
my dear!  Good day. madam."  And away he went, in a great hurry.

     Beth had a rapture with her mother, and then rushed up to
impart the glorious news to her family of invalids, as the girls
were not home.  How blithely she sang that evening, and how they
all laughed at her because she woke Amy in the night by playing
the piano on her face in her sleep.  Next day, having seen both
the old and young gentleman out of the house, Beth, after two or
three retreats, fairly got in at the side door, and made her way
as noiselessly as any mouse to the drawing room where her idol
stood. Quite by accident, of course, some pretty, easy music lay
on the piano, and with trembling fingers and frequent stops to
listen and look about, Beth at last touched the great instrument,
and straightway forgot her fear, herself, and everything else but
the unspeakable delight which the music gave her, for it was like
the voice of a beloved friend.

     She stayed till Hannah came to take her home to dinner, but she
had no appetite,and could only sit and smile upon everyone in a general
state of beatitude.

     After that, the little brown hood slipped through the hedge
nearly every day, and the great drawing room was haunted by a tuneful
spirit that came and went unseen.  She never knew that Mr. Laurence
opened his study door to hear the old-fashioned airs he liked.  She
never saw Laurie mount guard in the hall to warn the servants away.
She never suspected that the exercise books and new songs which she
found in the rack were put there for her especial benefit, and when
he talked to her about music at home, she only thought how kind he
was to tell things that helped her so much.  So she enjoyed herself
heartily, and found, what isn't always the case, that her granted
wish was all she had hoped.  Perhaps it was because she was so grateful
for this blessing that a greater was given her.  At any rate she
deserved both.

     "Mother, I'm going to work Mr. Laurence a pair of slippers.  He
is so kind to me, I must thank him, and I don't know any other way.
Can I do it?" asked Beth, a few weeks after that eventful call of his.

     "Yes, dear.  It will please him very much, and be a nice way of
thanking him.  The girls will help you about them, and I will pay for
the making up,"  replied Mrs. March, who took peculiar pleasure in
granting Beth's requests because she so seldom asked anything for
herself.

     After many serious discussions with Meg and Jo, the pattern was
chosen, the materials bought, and the slippers begun.  A cluster of
grave yet cheerful pansies on a deeper purple ground was pronounced
very appropriate and pretty, and beth worked away early and late, with
occasional lifts over hard parts.  She was a nimble little needlewoman,
and they were finished before anyone got tired of them.  Then she wrote
a short, simple note, and with Laurie's help, got them smuggled onto
the study table one morning before the old gentleman was up.

     When this excitement was over, Beth waited to see what would
happen.  All day passed a a part of the next before any acknowledge-
ment arrived, and she was beginning to fear she had offended her
crochety friend.  On the afternoon of the second day, she went out
to do an errand, and give poor Joanna, the invalid doll, her daily
exercise.  As she came up the street, on her return, she saw three,
yes, four heads popping in and out of the parlor windows, and the
moment they saw her, several hands were waved, and several joyful
voices screamed . . .

     "Here's a letter from the old gentleman!  Come quick, and read
it!"

     "Oh, Beth, he's sent you . . ." began Amy, gesticulating with
unseemly energy, but she got no further, for Jo quenched her by
slamming down the window.

     Beth hurried on in a flutter of suspense.  At the door her
sisters seized and bore her to the parlor in a triumphal procession,
all pointing and all saying at once, "Look there!  Look there!" Beth
did look, and turned pale with delight and surprise, for there stood
a little cabinet piano, with a letter lying on the glossy lid, directed
like a sign board to "Miss Elizabeth March."

     "For me?" gasped Beth, holding onto Jo and feeling as if she
should tumble down, it was such an overwhelming thing altogether.

     "Yes, all for you, my precious!  Isn't it splendid of him?  Don't
you think he's the dearest old man in the world?  Here's the key in
the letter.  We didn't open it, but we are dying to know what he says,"
cried Jo, hugging her sister and offering the note.

     "You read it!  I can't, I feel so queer!  Oh, it is too lovely!"
and Beth hid her face in Jo's apron, quite upset by her present.

     Jo opened the paper and began to laugh, for the first worked she
saw were . . .

     "Miss March:
        "Dear Madam--"
       "How nice it sounds!  I wish someone would write to me so!" said
Amy, who thought the old-fashioned address very elegant.

     "`I have had many pairs of slippers in my life, but I never had
any that suited me so well as yours,'" continues Jo.  "`Heartsease is
my favorite flower, and these will always remind me of the gentle
giver.  I like to pay my debts, so I know you will allow `the old
gentleman' to send you something which once belonged to the little
grand daughter he lost.  With hearty thanks and best wishes, I remain
     "`Your grateful friend and humble servant,
                                     "`JAMES LAURENCE'

     "There, Beth, that's an honor to be proud of, I'm sure! Laurie
told me how fond Mr.Laurence used to be of the child who died, and
how he kept all her little things carefully.  Just think, he's given
you her piano.  That comes of having big blue eyes and loving music,"
said Jo, trying to soothe Beth, who trembled and looked more excited
than she had ever been before.

     "See the cunning brackets to hold candles, and the nice green
sild, puckered up, with a gold rose in the middle, and the pretty
rack and stool, all complete," added Meg, opening the instrument
and displaying its beauties.

     "`Your humble servant, James Laurence'.  Only think of his
writing that to you.  I'll tell the girls.  They'll think it's
splendid," said Amy, much impressed by the note.

     "Try it, honey.  Let's hear the sound of the baby pianny,"
said Hannah, who always took a share in the family joys and sorrows.

     So Beth tried it, and everyone pronounced it the most remarkable
piano ever heard.  It had evidently been newly tuned and put in apple-
pie order, but, perfect as it was, I think the real charm lay in the
happiest of all happy faces which leaned over it, as Beth lovingly
touched the beautiful black and white keys and pressed the bright
pedals.

     "You'll have to go and thank him," said Jo, by way of a joke,
for the idea of the child's really going never entered her head.

     "Yes, I mean to.  I guess I'll go no, before I get frightened
thinking about it." And, to the utter amazement of the assembled
family, Beth walked deliberately down the garden, through the
hedge, and in at the Laurences' door.

     "Well, I wish I may die if it ain't the queerest thing I ever
see!  The pianny has turned her head!  She'd never have gone in
her right mind," cried Hannah, staring after her, while the girls
were rendered quite speechless by the miracle.

     They would have been still more amazed if they had seen what
Beth did afterward.  If you will believe me, she went and knocked
at the study door before she gave herself time to think, and when
a gruff voice called out, "come in!" she did go in, right up to
Mr. Laurence, who looked quite taken aback, and held out her hand,
saying, with only a small quaver in her voice, "I came to thank you,
sir, for. . ." But she didn't finish, for he looked so friendly that
she forgot her speech and, only remembering that he had lost the
little girl he loved, she put both arms round his neck and kissed
him.

     If the roof of the house had suddenly flown off, the old
gentleman wouldn't have been more astonished.  But he liked it.
Oh, dear, yes, he liked it amazingly!  And was so touched and
pleased by that confiding little kiss that all his crustiness
vanished, and he just set her on his knee, and laid his
wrinkled cheek against her rosy one, feeling as if he had got his
own little grand daughter back again.  Beth ceased to fear him
from that moment, and sat there talking to him as cozily as if
she had known him all her life, for love casts out fear, and
gratitude can conquer pride.  When she went home, he walked with
her to her own gate, shook hands cordially, and touched his hat
as he marched back again, looking very stately and erect, like
a handsome, soldierly old gentleman, as he was.

     When the girls saw that performance, Jo began to dance a jig,
by way of expressing her satisfaction, Amy nearly fell out of the
window in her surprise, and Meg exclaimed, with up-lifted hands,
"Well, I do believe the world is coming to an end.

                    CHAPTER SEVEN

     "That boy is a perfect cyclops, isn't he?" said Amy one day,
as Laurie clattered by on horseback, with a flourish of his whip
as he passed.

     "How dare you say so, when he's got both his eyes?  And
very handsome ones they are, too," cried Jo, who resented any
slighting remarks about her friend.

     "I didn't day anything about his eyes, and I don't see why
you need fire up when I admire his riding."

     "Oh, my goodness!  That little goose means a centaur, and she
called him a Cyclops," exclaimed Jo, with a burst of laughter.

     "You needn't be so rude, it's only a `lapse of lingy', as Mr.
Davis says," retorted Amy, finishing Jo with her Latin.  "I just
wish I had a little of the money Laurie spends on that horse," she
added, as if to herself, yet hoping her sisters would hear.

     "Why?" asked Meg kindly, for Jo had gone off in another laugh
at Amy's second blunder.

     "I need it so much.  I'm dreadfully in debt, and it won't be
my turn to have the rag money for a month."

     "In debt, Amy?  What do you mean?"  And Meg looked sober.

     "Why, I owe at least a dozen pickled limes, and I can't pay
them, you know, till I have money, for Marmee forbade my having
anything charged at the shop."

     "Tell me all about it. Are limes the fashion now?  It used
to be pricking bits of rubber to make balls."  And Meg tried to
keep her countenance, Amy looked so grave and important.

     "Why, you see, the girls are always buying them, and unless
you want to be thought mean, you must do it too.  It's nothing
but limes now, for everyone is sucking them in their desks in
schooltime, and trading them off for pencils, bead rings, paper
dolls, or something else, at recess.  If one girl likes another,
she gives her a lime.  If she's mad with her, she eats one before
her face, and doesn't offer even a suck.  They treat by turns,
and I've had ever so many but haven't returned them, and I ought
for they are debts of honor, you know."

     "How much will pay them off and restore your credit?" asked
Meg, taking out her purse."

     "A quarter would more than do it, and leave a few cents over
for a treat for you.  Don't you like limes?"

     "Not much.  You may have my share.  Here's the money.  Make it
last as long as you can, for it isn't very plenty, you know."

     "Oh, thank you!  It must be so nice to have pocket money!  I'll
have a grand feast, for I haven't tasted a lime this week.  I felt
delicate about taking any, as I couldn't return them, and I'm
actually suffering for one."

     Next day Amy was rather late at school, but could not resist the
temptation of displaying, with pardonable pride, a moist brown-paper
parcel, before she consigned it to the inmost recesses of her desk.
During the next few minutes the rumor that Amy March had got twenty-
four  delicious limes (she ate one on the way) and was going to
treat circulated through her `set', and the attentions of her friends
became quite overwhelming.  Katy Brown invited her to her next party
on the spot.  Mary Kinglsey insisted on lending her her watch till
recess, and Jenny Snow, a satirical young lady, who had basely twitted
Amy upon her limeless state, promptly buried the hatchet and offered
to furnish answers to certain appalling sums.  But Amy had not for-
gotten Miss Snow's cutting remarks about `some persons whose noses
were not too flat to smell other people's limes, and stuck-up people
who were not too proud to ask for them', and she instantly crushed
`that Snow girl's' hopes by the withering telegram, "You needn't be
so polite all of a sudden, for you won't get any."

     A distinguished personage happened to visit the school that
morning, and Amy's beautifully drawn maps received praise, which
honor to her foe rankled in the soul of Miss Snow, and caused Miss
March to assume the airs of a studious young peacock.  But, alas,
alas!  Pride goes before a fall, and the revengeful Snow turned the
tables with disastrous success.  No sooner had the guest paid the
usual stale compliments and bowed himself out, than Jenny, under
pretense of asking an important question, informed Mr. Davis, the
teacher, that Amy March had pickled limes in her desk.

     Now Mr. Davis had declared limes a contraband article, and
solemnly vowed to publicly ferrule the first person who was found
breaking the law.  This much-enduring man had succeeded in banishing
chewing gum after a long and stormy war, had made a bonfire of the
confiscated novels and newspapers, had suppressed a private post
office, had forbidden distortions of the face, nicknames, and cari-
catures, and done all that one man could do to keep half a hundred
rebellious girls in order.  Boys are trying enough to human patience,
goodness knows, but girls are infinitely more so, especially to
nervous gentlemen with tyrannical tempers and no more talent for
teaching than Dr. Blimber.  Mr. Davis knew any quantity of Greek,
Latin, algebra, and ologies of all sorts so he was called a fine
teacher, and manners, morals, feelings, and examples were not con-
sidered of any particular importance.  It was a most unfortunate
moment for denouncing Amy, and Jenny knew it.  Mr. Davis had
evidently taken his coffee too  strong that morning, there was an
east wind, which always affected his neuralgia, and his pupils had
not done him the credit which he felt he deserved.  Therefore, to
use the expressive, if not elegant, language of a schoolgirl, "He
was as nervous as a witch and as cross as a bear".  The word `limes'
was like fire to powder, his yellow face flushed, and he rapped on
his desk with an energy which made Jenny skip to her seat with
unusual rapidity.

     "Young ladies, attention, if you please!"

     At the stern order the buzz ceased, and fifty pairs of blue,
black, gray, and brown eyes were obediently fixed upon his awful
countenance.

     "Miss March, come to the desk."

     Amy rose to comply with outward composure, but a secret fear
oppressed her, for the limes weighed upon her conscience.

     "Bring with you the limes you have in your desk," was the
unexpected command which arrested her before she got out of her seat.

     "Don't take all." whispered her neighbor, a young lady of great
presence of mind.

     Amy hastily shook out half a dozen and laid the rest down before
Mr. Davis, feeling that any man possessing a human heart would relent
when that delicious perfume met his nose.  Unfortunately, Mr. Davis
particularly detested the odor of the fashionable pickle, and disgust
added to his wrath.

     "Is that all?"

     "Not quite," stammered Amy.

     "Bring the rest immediately."

     With a despairing glance at her set, she obeyed.

     "You are sure there are no more?'

     "I never lie, sir."

     "So I see.  Now take these disgusting things two by two, and
throw them out of the window."

     There was a simultaneous sigh, which created quite a little gust,
as the last hope fled, and the treat was ravished from their longing
lips.  Scarlet with shame and anger, Amy went to and fro six dreadful
times, and as each doomed couple, looking oh, so plump and juicy, fell
from her reluctant hands, a shout from the street completed the anguish
of the girls, for it told them that their feast was being exulted over
by the little Irish children, who were their sworn foes.  This--this
was too much.  All flashed indignant or appealing glances at the in-
exorable Davis, and one passionate lime lover burst into tears.

     As Amy returned from her last trip, Mr. Davis gave a portentous
"Hem!" and said, in his most impressive manner . . .

     "Young ladies, you remember what I said to you a week ago.  I
am sorry this has happened, but I never allow my rules to be infringed,
and I never break my word.  Miss March, hold out your hand."

     Amy started, and put both hands behind her, turning on him an
imploring look which pleaded for her better than the words she could
not utter.  She was rather a favorite with `old Davis', as, of course,
he was called, and it's my private belief that he would have broken
his word if the indignation of one irrepressible young lady had not
found vent in a hiss.  That hiss, faint as it was, irritated the
irascible gentleman, and sealed the culprit's fate.

     "Your hand, Miss March!" was the only answer her mute appeal
received, and too proud to cry or beseech, Amy set her teeth, threw
bach her head defiantly, and bore without flinching several tingling
blows on her little palm.  They were neither many nor heavy,but that
made no difference to her.  For the first time in her life she had
been struck, and the disgrace, in her eyes, was as deep as if he had
knocked her down.

     "You will now stand on the platform till recess," said Mr. Davis,
resolved to do the thing thoroughly, since he had begun.

     That was dreadful.  It would have been bad enough to go to her
seat, and see the pitying faces of her friends, or the satisfied
ones of her few enemies, but to face the whole school, with that
shame fresh upon her, seemed  impossible, and for a second she felt
as if she could only drop down where she stood, and break her heart
with crying. A bitter sense of wrong and the thought of Jenny Snow
helped her to bear it, and, taking the ignominious place, she fixed
her eyes on the stove funnel above what now seemed a sea of faces,
and stood there, so motionless and white that the girls found it
hard to study with that pathetic figure before them.

     During the fifteen minutes that followed, the proud and sensitive
little girl suffered a shame and pain which she never forgot.  To
others it might seem a ludicrous or trivial affair, but to her it was
a hard experience, for during the twelve years of her life she had been
governed by love alone, and a blow of that sort had never touched her
before.  The smart of her hand and the ache of her heart were forgotten
in the sting of the thought, "I shall have to tell at home, and they
will be so disappointed in me!"

     The fifteen minutes seemed an hour, but they came to an end at
last, and the word `Recess!' had never seemed so welcome to her before.

     "You can go, Miss March," said Mr. Davis, looking, as he felt,
uncomfortable.

     He did not soon forget the reproachful glance Amy gave him, as
she went, without a word to anyone, straight into the anteroom,
snatched her things, and left the place "forever," as she passionately
declared to herself.  She was in a sad state when she got home, and
when the older girls arrived, some time later, an indignation meeting
was held at once.  Mrs. March did not say much but looked disturbed,
and comforted her afflicted little daughter in her tenderest manner.
Meg bathed the insulted hand with glycerine and tears, Beth felt
that even her beloved kittens would fail as a balm for griefs like
this, Jo wrathfully proposed that Mr. Davis be arrested without delay,
and Hannah shook her fist at the `villain' and pounded potatoes for
dinner as if she had him under her pestle.

     No notice was taken of Amy's flight, except by her mates, but
the sharp-eyed demoiselles discovered that Mr. Davis was quite be-
nignant in the afternoon, also unusually nervous.  Just before
school closed, Jo appeared, wearing a grim expression as she
stalked up to the desk, and delivered a letter from her mother,
then collected Amy's property, and departed, carefully scraping
the mud from her boots on the door mat, as if she shook that dust
of  the place off her feet.

     "Yes, you can have a vacation from school, but I want you to
study a little every day with Beth," said Mrs. March that evening.
"I don't approve of corporal punishment, especially for girls.  I
dislike Mr. Davis's manner of teaching and don't think the girls
you associate with are doing you any good, so I shall ask your
father's  advice before I send you anywhere else."

     "That's good!  I wish all the girls would leave, and spoil
his old school.  It's perfectly maddening to think of those lovely
limes," sighed Amy, with the air of a martyr.

     "I am not sorry you lost them, for you broke the rules, and
deserved some punishment for disobedience," was the severe reply,
which rather disappointed the young lady, who expected nothing but
sympathy.

     "Do you mean you are glad I was disgraced before the whole
school?" cried Amy.

     "I should not have chosen that way of mending a fault,"
replied her mother, "but I'm not sure that it won't do you more
good than a molder method.  You are getting to be rather conceited,
my dear, and it is quite time you set about correcting it.  You
have a good many little gifts and virtues,but there is no need of
parading them, for conceit spoils the finest genius.  There is not
much danger that real talent or goodness will be overlooked long,
even if it is, the consciousness of possessing and using it well
should satisfy one, and the great charm of all power is modesty."

     "So it is!" cried Laurie, who was playing chess in a corner
with Jo.  "I knew a girl once, who had a really remarkable talent
for music, and she didn't know it, never guessed what sweet little
things she composed when she was alone, and wouldn't have believed
it if anyone had told her."

     "I wish I'd known that nice girl.  Maybe she would have helped
me, I'm so stupid," said Beth, who stood beside him, listening
eagerly.

     "You do know her, and she helps you better than anyone else
could," answered Laurie, looking at her with such mischievous
meaning in his merry black eyes that Beth suddenly turned very
red, and hid her face in the sofa cushion, quite overcome by such
an unexpected discovery.

     Jo let Laurie win the game to pay for that praise of her Beth,
who could not be prevailed upon to play for them after her compl-
iment.  So Laurie did his best, and sang delightfully, being in a
particularly lively humor, for to the Marches he seldom showed the
moody side of his character.  When he was gone, amy, who had been
pensive all evening, said suddenly, as if busy over some new idea,
"Is Laurie an accomplished boy?"

     "Yes, he has had an excellent education, and has much talent.
He will make a fine man, if not spoiled by petting," replied her
mother.

     "And he isn't conceited, is he?"  asked Amy.

     "Not in the least.  That is why he is so charming and we all
like him so much."

     "I see.  It's nice to have accomplishments and be elegant, but
not to show off or get perked up," said Amy thoughtfully.

     "These things are always seen and felt in a person's manner
and conversations, if modestly used, but it is not necessary to
display them," said Mrs. March.

     "Any more than it's proper to wear all your bonnets and gowns
and ribbons at once, that folks may know you've got them," added Jo,
and the lecture ended in a laugh.

                   CHAPTER EIGHT

     "Girls, where are you going?" asked Amy, coming into their
room one Saturday afternoon, and finding them getting ready to
go out with an air of secrecy which excited her curiosity.

     "Never mind.  Little girls shouldn't ask questions," returned
Jo sharply.

     Now if there is anything mortifying to out feelings when we
are young, it is to be told that, and to be bidden to "run away,
dear" is still more trying to us.  Amy bridled up at this insult,
and determined to find out the secret, if she teased for an hour.
Turning to Meg, who never refused her anything very long, she said
coaxingly, "Do tell me! I should think you might let me go, too,
for Beth is fussing over her piano, and I haven't got anything to
do, and am so lonely."

     "I can't, dear, because you aren't invited," began Meg, but
Jo broke in impatiently, "Now, Meg, be quiet or you will spoil it
all.  You can't go, Amy, so don't be a baby and whine about it."

     "You are going somewhere with Laurie, I know you are. You
were whispering and laughing together on the sofa last night, and
you stopped when I came in.  Aren't you going with him?"

     "Yes, we are.  Now do be still, and stop bothering."

     Amy held her tongue, but used her eyes, and saw Meg slip a
fan into her pocket.

     "I know!  I know!  You're going to the theater to see the
SEVEN CASTLES!" she cried, adding resolutely, "and I shall go,
for Mother said I might see it, and I've got my rag money, and
it was mean not to tell me in time."

     "Just listen to me a minute, and be a good child," said Meg
soothingly.  "Mother doesn't wish you to go this week, because
your eyes are not well enough yet to bear the light of this
fairy piece.  Next week you can go with Beth and Hannah, and
have a nice time."

     "I don't like that half as well as going with you and Laurie.
Please let me.  I've been sick with this cold so long, and shut
up, I'm dying for some fun.  Do, Meg!  I'll be ever so good,"
pleaded Amy, looking as pathetic as she could.

     "Suppose we take her.  I don't believe Mother would mind,
if we bundle her up well," began Meg.

     "If she goes I shan't, and if I don't, Laurie won't like it,
and it will be very rude, after he invited only us, to go and
drag in Amy.  I should think she'd hate to poke herself where
she isn't wanted," said Jo crossly, for she disliked the trouble
of overseeing a fidgety child when she wanted to enjoy herself.

     Her tone and manner angered Amy, who began to put her boots
on, saying, in her most aggravating way, "I shall go.  Meg says I
may, and if I pay for myself, Laurie hasn't anything to do with it."

     "You can't sit with us, for our seats are reserved, and you
mustn't sit alone, so Laurie will give you his place, and that
will spoil our pleasure. Or he'll get another seat for you, and
that isn't proper when you weren't asked.  You shan't stir a
step, so you may just stay where you are," scolded Jo, crosser
than ever, having just pricked her finger in her hurry.

     Sitting on the floor with one boot on, Amy began to cry
and Meg to reason with her, when Laurie called from below, and
the two girls hurried down, leaving their sister wailing.  For
now and then she forgot her grown-up ways and acted like a
spoiled child.  Just as the party was setting out, Amy called
over the banisters in a threatening tone, "You'll be sorry for
this, Jo March, see if you ain't."

     "Fiddlesticks!" returned Jo, slamming the door.

     They had a charming time, for THE SEVEN CASTLES OF THE
DIAMOND LAKE was as brilliant and wonderful as heart could wish.
But in spite of the comical red imps, sparkling elves, and the
gorgeous princes and princesses, Jo's pleasure had a drop of
bitterness in it.  The fairy queen's yellow curls reminded her
of Amy, and between the acts she amused herself with wondering
what her sister would do to make her `sorry for it'.  She and
Amy had had many lively skirmishes in the course of their lives,
for both had quick tempers and were apt to be violent when fairly
roused.  Amy teased Jo, and Jo irritated Amy, and semioccasional
explosions occurred, of which both were much ashamed afterward.
Although the oldest, Jo had the least self-control, and had hard
times trying to curb the fiery spirit which was continually getting
her into trouble.  Her anger never lasted long, and having humbly
confessed her fault, she sincerely repented and tried to do better.
Her sisters used to say that they rather liked to get Jo into a
fury because she was such an angel afterward.  Poor Jo tried
desperately to be good, but her bosom enemy was always ready to
flame up and defeat her, and it took years of patient effort to
subdue it.

     When they got home, they found amy reading in the parlor.
She assumed an injured air as they came in, never lifted her eyes
from her book, or asked a single question.  Perhaps curiosity
might have conquered resentment, if Beth had not been there to
inquire and receive a glowing description of the play.  On going
up to put away her best hat, Jo's first look was toward the
bureau, for in their last quarrel Amy had soothed her feelings
by turning Jo's top drawer upside down on the floor.  Everything
was in its place, however, and after a hasty glance into her
various closets, bags, and boxes, Jo decided that Amy had
forgiven  and forgotten her wrongs.

     There Jo was mistaken, for next day she made a discovery
which produced a tempest.  Meg, Beth, and Amy were sitting together,
late in the afternoon, when Jo burst into the room, looking excited
and demanding breathlessly, "Has anyone taken my book?"

     Meg and Beth said, "No." at once, and looked surprised. Amy
poked the fire and said nothing.  Jo saw her color rise and was
down upon her in a minute.

     "Amy, you've got it!"

     "No, I haven't."

     "You know where it is, then!"

     "No, I don't."

     "That's a fib!" cried Jo, taking her by the shoulders, and
looking fierce enough to frighten a much braver child than Amy.

     "It isn't.  I haven't got it, don't know where it is now, and
don't care."

     "You know something about it, and you'd better tell at once,
or I'll make you."  And Jo gave her a slight shake.

     "Scold as much as you like, you'll never see your silly old
book again," cried Amy, getting excited in her turn.

     "why not?"

     "I burned it up."

     "What!  My little book I was so fond of, and worked over, and
meant to finish before Father got home?  Have you really burned it?"
said Jo, turning very pale, while her eyes kindled and her hands
clutched Amy nervously.

     "Yes, I did!  I told you I'd make you pay for being so cross
yesterday, and I have, so . . ."

     Amy got no farther, for Jo's hot temper mastered her, and
she shook Amy till her teeth chattered in her head, crying in a
passion of grief and anger . . .

     "You wicked, wicked girl!  I never can write it again, and
I'll never forgive you as long as I live."

     Meg flew to rescue Amy, and Beth to pacify Jo, but Jo was
quite beside herself, and with a parting box on her sister's ear,
she rushed out of the room up to the old sofa in the garret, and
finished her fight alone.

     The storm cleared up below, for Mrs. March came home, and,
having heard the story, soon brought Amy to a sense of the wrong
she had done her sister.  Jo's book was the pride of her heart,
and was regarded by her family as a literary sprout of great
promise.  It was only half a dozen little fairy tales, but Jo
had worked over them patiently, putting her whole heart into
her work, hoping to make something good enough to print.  She
had just copied them with great care, and had destroyed the old
manuscript, so that Amy's bonfire had consumed the loving work
of several years.  It seemed a small loss to others, but to Jo
it was a dreadful calamity, and she felt that it never could be
made up to her.  Beth mourned as for a departed kitten, and Meg
refused to defend her pet.  Mrs. March looked grave and grieved,
and Amy felt that no one would love her till she had asked pardon
for the act which she now regretted more than any of them.

     When the tea bell rang, Jo appeared, looking so grim and
unapproachable that it took all Amy's courage to say meekly . . .

     "Please forgive me, Jo.  I'm very, very sorry."

     "I never shall forgive you," was Jo's stern answer, and
from that moment she ignored Amy entirely.

     No one spoke of the great trouble, not even Mrs. March, for
all had learned by experience that when Jo was in that mood words
were wasted, and the wisest course was to wait till some little
accident, or her own generous nature, softened Jo's resentment
and healed the breach.  It was not a happy evening, for though
they sewed as usual, while their mother read aloud from Bremer,
Scott, or Edgeworth, something was wanting, and the sweet home
peace was disturbed.  They felt this most when singing time came,
for Beth could only play, Jo stood dumb as a stone, and Amy broke
down, so Meg and Mother sang alone.  But in spite of their efforts
to be as cheery as larks, the flutelike voices did not seem to
chord as well as usual, and all felt out of tune.

     As Jo received her good-night kiss, Mrs. March whispered gently,
"My dear, don't let the sun go down upon your anger.  Forgive each
other, help each other, and begin again tomorrow."

     Jo wanted to lay her head down on that motherly bosom, and
cry her grief and anger all away, but tears were an unmanly weak-
ness, and she felt so deeply injured that she really couldn't
quite forgive yet.  So she winked hard, shook her head, and said
gruffly because Amy was listening, "It was an abominable thing,
and she doesn't deserve to be forgiven."

     With that she marched off to bed, and there was no merry
or confidential gossip that night.

     Amy was much offended that her overtures of peace had been
repulsed, and began to wish she had not humbled herself, to feel
more injured than ever, and to plume herself on her superior
virtue in a way which was particularly exasperating.  Jo still
looked like a thunder cloud, and nothing went well all day.  It
was bitter cold in the morning, she dropped her precious turnover
in the gutter, Aunt March had an attack of the fidgets, Meg was
sensitive, Beth would look grieved and wistful when she got home,
and Amy kept making remarks about people who were always talking
about being good and yet wouldn't even try when other people set
them a virtuous example.

     "Everybody is so hateful, I'll ask Laurie to go skating.  He
is always kind and jolly, and will put me to rights, I know," said
Jo to herself, and off she went.

     Amy heard the clash of skates, and looked out with an impatient
exclamation.

     "There!  She promised I should go next time, for this is the
last ice we shall have.  But it's no use to ask such a crosspatch
to take me."

     "Don't say that.  You were very naughty, and it is hard to
forgive the loss of her precious little book, but I think she
might do it now, and I guess she will, if you try her at the
right minute," said Meg.  "Go after them. Don't say anything till
Jo has got good-natured with Laurie, than take a quiet minute and
just kiss her, or do some kind thing, and I'm sure she'll be
friends again with all her heart."

     "I'll try," said Amy, for the advice suited her, and after a
flurry to get ready, she ran after the friends, who were just
disappearing over the hill.

     It was not far to the river, but both were ready before Amy
reached them.  Jo saw her coming, and turned her back.  Laurie did
not see, for he was carefully skating along the shore, sounding the
ice, for a warm spell had preceded the cold snap.

     "I'll go on to the first bend, and see if it's all right before
we begin to race," Amy heard him say, as he shot away, looking like
a young Russian in his fur-trimmed coat and cap.

     Jo heard Amy panting after her run, stamping her feet and
blowing on her fingers as she tried to put her skates on, but Jo
never turned and went slowly zigzagging down the river, taking a
bitter, unhappy sort of satisfaction in her sister's troubles.
She had cherished her anger till it grew strong and took possession
of her, as evil thoughts and feelings always do unless cast out at
once. As Laurie turned the bend, he shouted back . . .

     "Keep near the shore.  It isn't safe in the middle."

     Jo heard, but Amy was struggling to her feet and did not catch
a word.  Jo glanced over her shoulder, and the little demon she was
harboring said in her ear . . .

     "No matter whether she heard or not, let her take care of
herself."

     Laurie had vanished round the bend, Jo was just at the turn,
and Amy, far behind, striking out toward the the smoother ice in
the middle of the river.  For a minute Jo stood still with a
strange feeling in her heart, then she resolved to go on,but
something held and turned her round, just in time to see Amy throw
up her hands and go down, with a sudden crash of rotten ice, the
splash of water, and a cry that made Jo's heart stand still with
fear.  She tried to call Laurie, but her voice was gone.  She tried
to rush forward, but her feet seemed to have no strength in them,
and  for a second, she could only stand motionless, staring with a
terror-stricken face at the little blue hood above the black water.
Something rushed swiftly by her, and Laurie's voice cried out . . .

     "Bring a rail.  Quick, quick!"

     How she did it, she never knew, but for the next few minutes
she worked as if possessed, blindly obeying Laurie, who was quite
self-possessed, and lying flat, held Amy up by his arm and hockey
stick till Jo dragged a rail from the fence, and together they
got the child out, more frightened than hurt.

     "Now then, we must walk her home as fast as we can.  Pile our
things on her, while I get off these confounded skates," cried
Laurie, wrapping his coat round Amy, and tugging away at the straps
which never seemed so intricate before.

     Shivering, dripping, and crying, they got Amy home, and after
an exciting time of it, she fell asleep, rolled in blankets before
a hot fire. During the bustle Jo had scarcely spoken but flown
about, looking pale and wild, with her things half off, her dress
torn, and her hands cut and bruised by ice and rails and refrac-
tory buckles.  When Amy was comfortably asleep, the house quiet,
and Mrs. March sitting by the bed, she called Jo to her and began
to bind up the hurt hands.

     "Are you sure she is safe?" whispered Jo, looking remorse-
fully at the golden head, which might have been swept away from
her sight forever under the treacherous ice.

     "Quite safe, dear.  she is not hurt, and won't even take cold,
I think, you were so sensible in covering and getting her home
quickly," replied her mother cheerfully.

     "Laurie did it all.  I only let her go.  Mother, if she should
die, it would be my fault."  And Jo dropped down beside the bed in
a passion of penitent tears, telling all that had happened, bitterly
condemning her hardness of heart, and sobbing out her gratitude for
being spared the heavy punishment which might have come upon her.

     "It's my dreadful temper!  I try to cure it, I think I have,
and then it breaks out worse than ever.  OH, Mother, what shall I
do?  What shall I do?" cried poor Jo, in despair.

     "Watch and pray, dear, never get tired of trying, and never
think it is impossible to conquer your fault," said Mrs. March,
drawing the blowzy head to her shoulder and kissing the wet cheek
so tenderly that Jo cried even harder.

     "You don't know, you can't guess how bad it is!  It seems as
if I could do anything when I'm in a passion.  I get so savage, I
could hurt anyone and enjoy it.  I'm afraid I shall do something
dreadful some day, and spoil my life, and make everybody hate me.
Oh, Mother, help me, do help me!"

     "I will, my child, I will.  Don't cry so bitterly, but remember
this day, and resolve with all your soul that you will never know
another like it.  Jo, dear, we all have our temptations, some far
greater than yours, and it often takes us all our lives to conquer
them.  You think your temper is the worst in the world,but mine
used to be just like it."

     "Yours, Mother?  Why, you are never angry!"  And for the
moment Jo forgot remorse in surprise.

     "I've been trying to cure it for forty years, and have only
succeeded in controlling it.  I am angry nearly every day of my
life, Jo, but I have learned not to show it, and I still hope to
learn not to feel it, though it may take me another forty years
to do so."

     The patience and the humility of the face she loved so well
was a better lesson to Jo than the wisest lecture, the sharpest
reproof.  She felt comforted at once by the sympathy and confi-
dence given her.  The knowledge that her mother had a fault like
hers, and tried to mend it, made her own easier to bear and
strengthened her resolution to cure it, though forty years seemed
rather a long time to watch and pray to a girl of fifteen.

     "Mother, are you angry when you fold your lips tight together
and go out of the room sometimes, when Aunt March scolds or people
worry you?"  asked  Jo, feeling nearer and dearer to her mother
than ever before.

     "Yes, I've learned to check the hasty words that rise to my
lips, and when I feel that they mean to break out against my will,
I just go away for a minute, and give myself a little shake for
being so weak and wicked," answered Mrs. March with a sigh and a
smile, as she smoothed and fastened up Jo's disheveled hair.

     "How did you learn to keep still?  That is what troubles me,
for the sharp words fly out before I know what I'm about, and the
more I say the worse I get, till it's a pleasure to hurt people's
feelings and say dreadful things.  Tell me how you do it, Marmee
dear."

     "My good mother used to help me . . ."

     "As you do us . . ." interrupted Jo, with a grateful kiss.

     "But I lost her when I was a little older than you are, and
for years had to struggle on alone, for I was too proud to confess
my weakness to anyone else.  I had a hard time, Jo, and shed a good
many bitter tears over my failures, for in spite of my efforts I
never seemed to get on.  Then your father came, and I was so happy
that i found it easy to be good.  But by-and-by, when I had four
little daughters round me and we were poor, then the old trouble
began again, for I am not patient by nature, and it tried me very
much to see my children wanting anything."

     "Poor Mother!  What helped you then?"

     "Your father, Jo.  He never loses patience, never doubts or
complains, but always hopes, and works and waits so cheerfully
that one is ashamed to do otherwise before him.  He helped and
comforted me, and showed me that I must try to practice all the
virtues I would have my little girls possess, for I was their
example.  It was easier to try for your sakes than for my own.
A startled or surprised look from one of you when I spoke sharply
rebuked me more than any words could have done, and the love,
respect, and confidence of my children was the sweetest reward I
could receive for my efforts to be the woman I would have them
copy."

     "Oh, Mother, if I'm ever half as good as you, I shall be
satisfied," cried Jo, much touched.

     "I hope you will be a great deal better, dear, but you must
keep watch over your `bosom enemy', as father calls it, or it
may sadden, if not spoil your life.  You have had a warning.
Remember it, and try with heart and soul to master this quick
temper, before it brings you greater sorrow and regret than you
have known today."

     "I will try, Mother, I truly will.  But you must help me,
remind me, and keep me from flying out.  I used to see Father
sometimes put his finger on his lips, and look at you with a
very kind but sober face, and you always folded your lips tight
and went away.  Was he reminding you then?"  asked Jo softly.

     "Yes.  I asked him to help me so, and he never forgot it,
but saved me from many a sharp word by that little gesture
and kind look."

     Jo saw that her mother's eyes filled and her lips trembled
as she spoke, and fearing that she had said too much, she
whispered anxiously,  "Was it wrong to watch you and to speak of
it?  I didn't mean to be rude, but it's so comfortable to say all
I think to you, and feel so safe and happy here."

    "Mu Jo, you may say anything to your mother, for it is my
greatest happiness and pride to feel that my girls confide in me
and know how much I love them."

     "I thought I'd grieved you."

     "No, dear, but speaking of Father reminded me how much I
miss him, how much I owe him, and how faithfully I should watch
and work to keep his little daughters safe and good for him."

     "Yet you told him to go, Mother, and didn't cry when he
went, and never complain now, or seem as if you needed any help,"
said Jo, wondering.

     "I gave my best to the country I love, and kept my tears
till he was gone.  Why should I complain, when we both have
merely done our duty and will surely be the happier for it in
the end?  If I don't seem to need help, it is because I have a
better friend, even than Father, to comfort and sustain me.  My
child, the troubles and temptations of your life are beginning
and may be many, but you can overcome and outlive them all if
you learn to feel the strength and tenderness of your Heavenly
Father as you do that of your earthly one.  The more you love
and trust Him, and the less you will depend on human power and
wisdom.  His love and care never tire or change, can never be
taken from you, but my become the source of lifelong peace,
happiness, and strength.  Believe this heartily, and go to God
with all your little cares, and hopes, and sins, and sorrows, as
freely and confidingly as you come to your mother."

     Jo's only answer was to hold her mother close, and in the
silence which followed the sincerest prayer she had ever prayed
left her heart without words.  For in that sad yet happy hour,
she had learned not only the bitterness of remorse and despair,
but the sweetness of self-denial and self-control, and led by
her mother's hand, she had drawn nearer to the Friend who always
welcomes every child with a love stronger than that of any father,
tenderer than that of any mother.

     Amy stirred and sighed in her sleep, and as if eager to begin
at once to mend her fault,l Jo looked up with an expression on her
face which it had never worn before.

     "I let the sun go down on my anger.  I wouldn't forgive her,
and today, if it hadn't been for Laurie, it might have been too
late!  How could I be so wicked?" said Jo, half aloud, as she
leaned over her sister softly stroking the wet hair scattered on
the pillow.

     As if she heard, Amy opened her eyes, and held out her arms,
with a smile that went straight to Jo's heart.  Neither said a
word, but they hugged one another close, in spite of the blankets,
and everything was forgiven and forgotten in one hearty kiss.

                        CHAPTER NINE

     "I do think it was the most fortunate thing in the world that
those children should have the measles just now," said Meg, one
April day, as she stood packing the `go abroady' trunk in her room,
surrounded by her sisters.

     "And so nice of Annie Moffat not to forget her promise.  A
whole fortnight of fun will be regularly splendid," replied Jo,
looking like a windmill as she folded skirts with her long arms.

     "And such lovely weather, I'm so glad of that," added Beth,
tidily sorting neck and hair ribbons in her best box, lent for
the great occasion.

     "I wish I was going to have a fine time and wear all these
nice things," said Amy with her mouth full of pins, as she
artistically replenished her sister's cushion.

     "I wish you were all going, but as you can't, I shall keep
my adventures to tell you when I come back.  I'm sure it's the
least I can do when you have been so kind, lending me things
and helping me get ready," said Meg, glancing round the room
at the very simple outfit, which seemed nearly perfect in their
eyes.

     "What did Mother give you out of the treasure box?"  asked
Amy, who had not been present at the opening of a certain cedar
chest in which Mrs. March kept a few relics of past splendor, as
gifts for her girls when the proper time came.

     "A pair of silk stockings, that pretty carved fan, and a
lovely blue sash.  I wanted the violet silk, but there isn't
time to make it over, so I must be contented with my old tarlatan."

     "It will look nice over my new muslin skirt, and the sash will
set it off beautifully.  I wish I hadn't smashed my coral bracelet,
for you might have had it," said Jo, who loved to give and lend,
but whose possessions were usually too dilapidated to be of much
use.

     "There is a lovely old-fashioned pearl set in the treasure
chest, but Mother said real flowers were the prettiest ornament
for a young girl, and Laurie promised to send me all I want,"
replied Meg.  "Now, let me see, there's my new gray walking suit,
just curl up the feather in my hat, Beth, then my poplin for
Sunday and the small party, it looks heavy for spring, doesn't
it?  The violet silk would be so nice.  Oh, dear!"

     "Never mind, you've got the tarlatan for the big party, and
you always look like an angel in white," said Amy, brooding
over the little store of finery in which her soul delighted.

     "It isn't low-necked, and it doesn't sweep enough, but it
will have to do.  My blue housedress looks so well, turned and
freshly trimmed, that I feel as if I'd got a new one.  My silk
sacque isn't a bit the fashion, and my bonnet doesn't look like
Sallie's.  I didn't like to say anything, but I was sadly dis-
appointed in my umbrella.  I told Mother black with a white
handle, but she forgot and bought a green one with a yellowish
handle.  It's strong and neat, so I ought not to complain, but I
know I shall feel ashamed of it beside Annie's silk one with a
gold top," sighed Meg, surveying the little umbrella with great
disfavor.

     "Change it," advised Jo.

     "I won't be so silly, or hurt Marmee's feelings, when she
took so much pains to get my things.  It's a nonsensical notion
of mine, and I'm not going to give up to it.  My silk stockings
and two pairs of new gloves are my comfort.  You are a dear to
lend me yours, Jo.  I feel so rich and sort of elegant, with
two new pairs, and the old ones cleaned up for common."  And
Meg took a refreshing peep at her glove box.

     "Annie Moffat has blue and pink bows on her nightcaps.
Would you put some on mine?" she asked, as Beth brought up a
pile of snowy muslins, fresh from Hannah's hands.

     "No, I wouldn't, for the smart caps won't match the plain
gowns without any trimming on them.  Poor folks shouldn't rig,"
said Jo decidedly.

     "I wonder if I shall ever be happy enough to have real lace
on my clothes and bows on my caps?" said Meg impatiently.

     "You said the other day that you'd be perfectly happy if
you could only go to Annie Moffat's," observed Beth in her quiet
way.

     "So I did!  Well, I am happy, and I won't fret, but it does
seem as if the more one gets the more one wants, doesn't it?  There
now, the trays are ready, and everything in but my ball dress,
which I shall leave for Mother to pack," said Meg, cheering up, as
she glanced from the half-filled trunk to the many times pressed
and mended white tarlatan, which she called her `ball dress' with
an important air.

     The next day was fine, and Meg departed in style for a fort-
night of novelty and pleasure.  Mrs. March had consented to the
visit rather reluctantly, fearing that Margaret would come back
more discontented than she went.  But she begged so hard, and
Sallie had promised to take good care of her, and a little pleasure
seemed so delightful after a winter of irksome work that the mother
yielded, and the daughter went to take her first taste of fashion-
able life.

     The Moffats were very fashionable, and simple Meg was rather
daunted, at first, by the splendor of the house and the elegance
of its occupants.  But they were kindly people, in spite of the
frivolous life they led, and soon put their guest at her ease.
Perhaps Meg felt, without understanding why, that they were not
particularly cultivated or intelligent people, and that all their
gilding could not quite conceal the ordinary material of which
they were made.  It certainly was agreeable to fare sumptuously,
drive in a fine carriage, wear her best frock every day, and do
nothing but enjoy herself.  It suited her exactly, and soon she
began to imitate the manners and conversation of those about her,
to put on little airs and graces, use French phrases, crimp her
hair, take in her dresses, and talk about the fashions as well as
she could. The more she saw of Annie Moffat's pretty things, the
more she envied her and sighed to be rich.  Home now looked bare
and dismal as she thought of it, work grew harder than ever, and
she felt that she was a very destitute and much-injured girl, in
spite of the new gloves and silk stockings.

     She had not much time for repining, however, for the three
young girls were busily employed in `having a good time'.  They
shopped, walked, rode, and called all day, went to theaters and
operas or frolicked at home in the evening, for Annie had many
friends and knew how to entertain them.  Her older sisters were
very fine young ladies, and one was engaged, which was extremely
interesting and romantic, Meg thought.  Mr. Moffat was a fat,
jolly old gentleman, who knew her father, and Mrs. Moffat, a fat,
jolly old lady, who took as great a fancy to Meg as her daughter
had done.  Everyone petted her, and `Daisey', as they called her,
was in a fair way to have her head turned.

     When the evening for the small party came, she found that
the poplin wouldn't do at all, for the other girls were putting
on thin dresses and making themselves very fine indeed.  So out
came the tarlatan, looking older, limper, and shabbier than ever
beside Sallie's crisp new one.  Meg saw the girls glance at it
and then at one another, and her cheeks began to burn, for with
all her gentleness she was very proud.  No one said a word about
it, but Sallie offered to dress her hair, and Annie to tie her
sash, and Belle, the engaged sister, praised her white arms.  But
in their kindness Meg saw only pity for her poverty, and her
heart felt very heavy as she stood by herself, while the others
laughed, chattered, and flew about like gauzy butterflies.  The
hard, bitter feeling was getting pretty bad, when the maid
brought in a box of flowers.  Before she could speak, Annie had
the cover off, and all were exclaiming at the lovely roses, heath,
and fern within.

     "It's for Belle, of course, George always sends her some,
but these are altogether ravishing," cried Annie, with a great
sniff.

     "They are for Miss March, the man said.  And here's a note,"
put in the maid, holding it to Meg.

     "What fun!  Who are they from?  Didn't know you had a lover,"
cried the girls, fluttering about Meg in a high state of curiosity
and surprise.

     "The note is from Mother, and the flowers from Laurie," said
Meg simply, yet much gratified that he had not forgotten her.

     "Oh, indeed!" said Annie with a funny look, as Meg slipped
the note into her pocket as a sort of talisman against envy,
vanity, and false pride, for the few loving words had done her
good, and the flowers cheered her up by their beauty.

     Feeling almost happy again,she laid by a few ferns and roses
for herself, and quickly made up the rest in dainty bouquets for
the breasts, hair, or skirts of her friends, offering them so
prettily that Clara, the elder sister, told her she was  `the
sweetest little thing she ever saw', and they looked quite
charmed with her small attention.  Somehow the kind act finished
her despondency, and when all the rest went to show themselves
to Mrs. Moffat, she saw a happy, bright-eyed face in the mirror,
as she laid her ferns against her rippling hair and fastened
the roses in the dress that didn't strike her as so very shabby
now.

     She enjoyed herself very much that evening, for she danced
to her heart's content.  Everyone was very kind, and she had
three compliments.  Annie made her sing, and some one said she
had a remarkably fine voice.  Major Lincoln asked who `the fresh
little girl with the beautiful eyes' was, and Mr. Moffat insisted
on dancing with her because she `didn't dawdle, but had some spring
in her', as he gracefully expressed it.  So altogether she had a
very nice time, till she overheard a bit of conversation, which
disturbed her extremely.  She was sitting just inside the conserv-
atory, waiting for her partner to bring her an ice, when she
heard a voice ask on the other side of the flowery wall . . .

     "How old is he?"

     "Sixteen or seventeen, I should say," replied another voice.

     "It would be a grand thing for one of those girls, wouldn't
it?  Sallie says they are very intimate now, and the old man quite
dotes on them."

     "Mrs. M. has made her plans, I dare say, and will play her
cards well, early as it is.  The girl evidently doesn't think of it
yet," said Mrs. Moffat.

     "She told that fib about her momma, as if she did know, and
colored up when the flowers came quite prettily.  Poor thing!
She'd be so nice if she was only got up in style.  Do you think
she'd be offended if we offered to lend her a dress for Thursday?"
asked another voice.

     "She's proud, but I don't believe she'd mind, for that dowdy
tarlatan is all she has got.  She may tear it tonight, and that
will be a good excuse for offering a decent one."

     Here Meg's partner appeared, to find her looking much flushed
and rather agitated.  She was proud, and her pride was useful
just then, for it helped her hide her mortification, anger, and
disgust at what she had just heard.  For, innocent and unsuspicious
as she was, she could not help understanding the gossip of her
friends.  She tried to forget it, but could not, and kept repeating
to herself, "Mrs. M. has made her plans,"  "that fib about her
mamma,"  and 'dowdy tarlatan," till she was ready to cry and rush
home to tell her troubles and ask for advice.  As that was imposs-
ible, she did her best to seem gay, and being rather excited, she
succeeded so well that no one dreamed what an effort she was making.
She was very glad when it was all over and she was quiet in her bed,
where she could think and wonder and fume till her head ached and
her hot cheeks were cooled by a few natural tears.  Those foolish,
yet well meant words, had opened a new world to Meg, and much
disturbed the peace of the old one in which till now she had lived
as happily as a child.  Her innocent friendship with Laurie was
spoiled by the silly speeches she had overheard.  Her faith in her
mother was a little shaken by the worldly plans attributed to her
by Mrs. Moffat, who judged others by herself, and the sensible
resolution to be contented with the simple wardrobe which suited
a poor man's daughter was weakened by the unnecessary pity of
girls who thought a shabby dress one of the greatest calamities
under heaven.

     Poor Meg had a restless night, and got up heavy-eyed, unhappy,
half resentful toward her friends, and half ashamed of herself for
not speaking out frankly and setting everything right.  Everybody
dawdled that morning, and it was noon before the girls found
energy enough even to take up their worsted work.  Something in
the manner of her friends struck Meg at once.  They treated her
with more respect, she thought, took quite a tender interest in
what she said, and looked at her with eyes that plainly betrayed
curiosity.  All this surprised and flattered her, though she did
not understand it till Miss Belle looked up from her writing, and
said, with a sentimental air . . .

     "Daisy, dear, I've sent an invitation to your friend, Mr.
Laurence, for Thursday.  We should like to know him, and it's only
a proper compliment to you."

     Meg colored, but a mischievous fancy to tease the girls made
her reply demurely, "You are very kind, but I'm afraid he won't
come."

     "Why not, Cherie?" asked Miss Belle.

     "He's too old."

     "My child, what do you mean?  What is his age, I beg to
know!" cried Miss Clara.

     "Nearly seventy, I believe," answered Meg, counting stitches
to hide the merriment in her eyes.

     "You sly creature!  Of course we meant the young man,"
exclaimed Miss Belle, laughing.

     "There isn't any, Laurie is only a little boy."  And Meg
laughed also at the queer look which the sisters exchanged as she
thus described her supposed lover.

     "About you age," Nan said.

     "Nearer my sister Jo's, I am seventeen in August," returned
Meg, tossing her head.

     "It's very nice of him to send you flowers, isn't it?" said
Annie, looking wise about nothing.

     "Yes, he often does, to all of us, for their house is full, and
we are so fond of them.  My mother and old Mr. Laurence are friends,
you know, so it is quite natural that we children should play to-
gether."  And Meg hoped they would say no more.

     "It's evident Daisy isn't out yet," said Miss Clara to Belle
with a nod.

     "Quite a pastoral state of innocence all round," returned
Miss Belle with a shrug.

     "I'm going out to get some little matters for my girls.  Can
I do anything for you, young ladies?"  asked Mrs. Moffat, lumbering
in like an elephant in silk and lace.

     "No, thank you, ma'am," replied Sallie.  "I've got my new
pink silk for Thursday and don't want a thing."

     "Nor I . . ." began Meg, but stopped because it occurred to
her that she did want several things and could not have them.

     "What shall you wear?" asked Sallie.

     "My old white one again, if I can mend it fit to be seen, it
got sadly torn last night," said Meg, trying to speak quite easily,
but feeling very uncomfortable.

     "Why don't you send home for another?" said Sallie, who was
not an observing young lady.

     "I haven't got any other."  It cost Meg an effort to say that,
but Sallie did not see it and exclaimed in amiable surprise,  "Only
that?"  How funny . . ."  She did not finish her speech, for Belle
shook her head at her and broke in, saying kindly . . .

     "Not at all.  Where is the use of having a lot of dresses
when she isn't out yet?  There's no need of sending home, Daisy,
even if you had a dozen, for I've got a sweet blue silk laid away,
which I've outgrown, and you shall wear it to please me, won't
you, dear?"

     "You are very kind, but I don't mind my old dress if you
don't, it does well enough for a little girl like me," said Meg.

     "Now do let me please myself by dressing you up in style.
I admire to do it, and you'd be a regular little beauty with a
touch here and there.  I shan't let anyone see you till you are
done, and then we'll burst upon them like Cinderella and her
godmother going to the ball," said Belle in her persuasive tone.

     Meg couldn't refuse the offer so kindly made, for a desire to
see if she would be `a little beauty' after touching up caused
her to accept and forget all her former uncomfortable feelings
toward the Moffats.

     On the Thursday evening, Belle shut herself up with her maid,
and between them they turned Meg into a fine lady.  They crimped
and curled her hair, they polished her neck and arms with some
fragrant powder, touched her lips with coralline salve to make
them redder, and Hortense would have added `a soupcon of rouge',
if Meg had not rebelled.  They laced her into a sky-blue dress,
which was so tight she could hardly breathe and so low in the
neck that modest Meg blushed at herself in the mirror.  A set
of silver filagree was added, bracelets, necklace, brooch, and
even earrings, for Hortense tied them on with a bit of pink
silk which did not show.  A cluster of tea-rose buds at the
bosom and a ruche, reconciled Meg to the display of her pretty,
white shoulders, and a pair of high-heeled silk boots satisfied
the last wish of her heart.  A lace handkerchief, a plumy fan,
and a bouquet in a shoulder holder finished her off, and Miss
Belle surveyed her with the satisfaction of a little girl with
a newly dressed doll.

     "Mademoiselle is chatmante, tres jolie, is she not?" cried
Hortense, clasping her hands in an affected rapture.

     "Come and show yourself," said Miss Belle, leading the way
to the room where the others were waiting.

     As Meg went rustling after, with her long skirts trailing,
her earrings tinkling, her curls waving, and her heart beating,
she felt as if her fun had really begun at last, for the mirror
had plainly told her that she was `a little beauty'.  Her friends
repeated the pleasing phrase enthusiastically, and for several
minutes she stood, like a jackdaw in the fable, enjoying her
borrowed plumes, while the rest chattered like a party of magpies.

     "While I dress, do you drill her, Nan, in the management of her
skirt and those French heels, or she will trip herself up.  Take
your silver butterfly, and catch up that long curl on the left side
of her head, Clara, and don't any of you disturb the charming work
of my hands," said Belle, as she hurried away, looking well pleased
with her success.

     "You don't look a bit like yourself, but you are very nice.
I'm nowhere beside you, for Belle has heaps of taste, and you're
quite French, I assure you.  Let your flowers hang, don't be so
careful of them, and be sure you don't trip," returned Sallie, trying
not to care that Meg was prettier than herself.

     Keeping that warning carefully in mind, Margaret got safely
downstairs and sailed into the drawing rooms where the Moffats and
a few early guests were assembled.  She very soon discovered that
there is a charm about fine clothes which attracts a certain class
of people and secures their respect.  Several young ladies, who
had  taken no notice of her before, were very affectionate all of
a sudden.  Several young gentlemen, who had only stared at her at
the other party, now not only stared, but asked to be introduced,
and said all manner of foolish but agreeable things to her, and
several old ladies, who sat on the sofas, and criticized the rest
of the party, inquired who she was with an air of interest.  She
heard Mrs. Moffat reply to one of them . . .

     "Daisy March--father a colonel in the army--one of our first
families, but reverses of fortune, you know; intimate friends of
the Laurences; sweet creature, I assure you; my Ned is quite wild
about her."

     "Dear me!" said the old lady, putting up her glass for
another observation of Meg, who tried to look as if she had not
heard and been rather shocked at Mrs. Moffat's fibs.

     The `queer feeling' did not pass away, but she imagined
herself acting the new part of fine lady and so got on pretty
well, though the tight dress gave her a side-ache, the train kept
getting under her feet, and she was in constant fear lest her
earrings should fly off and get lost or broken. She was flirting
her fan and laughing at the feeble jokes of a young gentleman
who tried to be witty, when she suddenly stopped laughing and
looked confused, for just opposite, she saw Laurie.  He was
staring at her with undisguised surprise, and disapproval also,
she thought, for though he bowed and smiled, yet something in
his honest eyes made her blush and wish she had her old dress on.
To complete her confusion, she saw Belle nudge Annie, and both
glance from her to Laurie, who, she was happy to see, looked
unusually boyish and shy.

     "Silly creatures, to put such thoughts into my head. I won't
care for it, or let it change me a bit," thought Meg, and rustled
across the room to shake hands with her friend.

     "I'm glad you came, I was afraid you wouldn't." she said,
with her most grown-up air.

     "Jo wanted me to come, and tell her how you looked, so I
did," answered Laurie, without turning his eyes upon her, though
he half smiled at her maternal tone.

     "What shall you tell her?"  asked Meg, full of curiosity to
know his opinion of her, yet feeling ill at ease with him for the
first time.

     "I shall say I didn't know you, for you look so grown-up and
unlike yourself, I'm quite afraid of you," he said, fumbling at
his glove button.

     "How absurd of you!  The girls dressed me up for fun, and I
rather like it.   Wouldn't Jo stare if she saw me?" said Meg, bent
on making him say whether he thought her improved or not.

     "Yes, I think she would," returned Laurie gravely.

    "Don't you like me so?' asked Meg.

     "No, I don't," was the blunt reply.

     "Why not?" in an anxious tone.

     He glanced at her frizzled head, bare shoulders, and fantas-
tically trimmed dress with an expression that abashed her more
than his answer, which had not particle of his usual politeness
in it.

     "I don't like fuss and feathers."

     That was altogether too much from a lad younger than herself,
and Meg walked away, saying petulantly, "You are the rudest boy I
ever saw."

    Feeling very much ruffled, she went and stood at a quiet window
to cool her cheeks, for the tight dress gave her an uncomfortably
brilliant color.  As she stood there, Major Lincoln passed by, and
a minute after she heard him saying to his mother . . .

     "They are making a fool of that little girl.  I wanted you
to see her, but they have spoiled her entirely.  She's nothing
but a doll tonight."

     "Oh, dear!" sighed Meg.  "I wish I'd been sensible and worn
my own things, then I should not have disgusted other people, or
felt so uncomfortable and ashamed of myself."

     She leaned her forehead on the cool pane, and stood half
hidden by the curtains, never minding that her favorite waltz
had begun, till some one touched her, and turning, she saw
Laurie, looking penitent, as he said, with his very best bow
and his hand out . . .

     "Please forgive my rudeness, and come and dance with me."

     "I'm afraid it will be to disagreeable to you," said Meg,
trying to look offended and failing entirely.

     "Not a bit of it, I'm dying to do it.  Come, I'll be good.
I don't like your gown, but I do think you are just splendid."
And he waved his hands, as if words failed to express his
admiration.

     Meg smiled and relented, and whispered as they stood waiting
to catch the time, "Take care my skirt doesn't trip you up.  It's
the plague of my life and I was a goose to wear it."

     "Pin it round your neck, and then it will be useful," said
Laurie, looking down at the little blue boots, which he evidently
approved of.

     Away they went fleetly and gracefully, for having practiced
at home, they were well matched, and the blithe young couple were
a pleasant sight to see, as they twirled merrily round and round,
feeling more friendly than ever after their small tiff.

     "Laurie,I want you to do me a favor, will you?'  said Meg,
as he stood fanning her when her breath gave out, which it did
very soon though she would not own why.

     "Won't I!" said Laurie, with alacrity.

     "Please don't tell them at home about my dress tonight.
They won't understand the joke, and it will worry Mother.'

     "Then why did you do it?" said Laurie's eyes, so plainly
that Meg hastily added . . .

     "I shall tell them myself all about it, and `fess' to Mother
how silly I've been.  But I'd rather do it myself.  So you'll not
tell, will you?"

     "I give you my word I won't, only what shall I say when
they ask me?"

     "Just say I looked pretty well and was having a good time."

     "I'll say the first with all my heart, but how about the
other?  You don't look as if you were having a good time.  Are
you?'  And Laurie looked at her with an expression which made her
answer in a whisper . . .

     "No, not just now.  Don't think I'm horrid.  I only wanted
a little fun, but this sort doesn't pay, I find, and I'm getting
tired of it."

     "Here comes Ned Moffat.  What does he want?" said Laurie,
knitting his black brows as if he did not regard his young host
in the light of a pleasant addition to the party.

     "He put his name down for three dances, and I suppose he's
coming for them.  What a bore!"  said Meg, assuming a languid air
which amused Laurie immensely.

     He did not speak to her again till suppertime, when he saw
her drinking champagne with Ned and his friend Fisher, who were
behaving `like a pair of fools', as Laurie said to himself, for
he felt a brotherly sort of right to watch over the Marches and
fight their battles whenever a defender was needed.

     "You'll have a splitting headache tomorrow, if you drink
much of that.  I wouldn't, Meg, your mother doesn't like it, you
know," he whispered, leaning over her chair, as Ned turned to
refill her glass and Fisher stooped to pick up her fan.

     "I'm not Meg tonight, I'm `a doll' who does all sorts of
crazy things.  Tomorrow I shall put away my `fuss and feathers'
and be desperately good again," se answered with an affected
little laugh.

     "Wish tomorrow was here,then," muttered Laurie, walking off,
ill-pleased at the change he saw in her.

     Meg danced and flirted, chattered and giggled, as the other
girls did.  After supper she undertook the German, and blundered
through it, nearly upsetting her partner with her long skirt, and
romping in a way that scandalized Laurie, who looked on and medi-
tated a lecture.  But he got no chance to deliver it, for Meg kept
away from him till he came to say good night.

     "Remember!" she said, trying to smile, for the splitting
headache had already begun.

     "Silence a` la mort," replied Laurie, with a melodramatic
flourish, as he went away.

     This little bit of byplay excited Annie's curiosity, but Meg
was too tired for gossip and went to bed, feeling as if she had
been to a masquerade and hadn't enjoyed herself as much as she
expected. She was sick all the next day, and on Saturday went home,
quite used up with her fortnight's fun and feeling that she had
`sat in the lap of luxury' long enough.

     "It does seem pleasant to be quiet, and not have company
manners on all the time.  Home is a nice place, though it isn't
splendid," said Meg, looking about her with a restful expression,
as she sat with her mother and Jo on the Sunday evening.

     "I'm glad to hear you say so, dear, for I was afraid home
would seem dull and poor to you after your fine quarters," replied
her mother, who had given her many anxious looks that day.  For
motherly eyes are quick to see any change in children's faces.

     Meg had told her adventures gayly and said over and over what
a charming time she had had, but something still seemed to weigh
upon her spirits, and when the younger girls were gone to bed, she
sat thoughtfully staring at the fire, saying little and looking
worried.  As the clock struck nine and Jo proposed bed, Meg
suddenly left her chair and, taking Beth's stool, leaned her elbows
on her mother's knee, saying bravely . . .

     "Marmee, I want to `fess'."

     "I thought so.  What is it, dear?"

     "Shall I go away?" asked Jo discreetly.

     "Of course not.  Don't I always tell you everything?  I was
ashamed to speak of it before the younger children, but I want you
to know all the dreadful things I did at the Moffats'."

     "We are prepared," said Mrs. March, smiling but looking a
little anxious.

     "I told you they dressed me up, but I didn't tell you that
they powdered and squeezed and frizzled, and made me look like a
fashion plate.  Laurie thought I wasn't proper.  I know he did,
though he didn't say so, and one man called me `a doll'.  I knew
it was silly, but they flattered me and said I was a beauty, and
quantities of nonsense, so I let them make a fool of me."

     "Is that all?" asked Jo, as Mrs. March looked silently at
the downcast face of her pretty daughter, and could not find it
in her heart to blame her little follies.

     "No, I drank champagne and romped and tried to flirt, and
was altogether abominable," said Meg self-reproachfully.

     "There is something more, I think."  And Mrs. March smoothed
the soft cheek,which suddenly grew rosy as Meg answered slowly . . .

     "Yes.  It's very silly, but I want to tell it, because I hate
to have people say and think such things about us and Laurie."

     Then she told the various bits of gossip she had heard at the
Moffats', and as she spoke, Jo saw her mother fold her lips tightly,
as if ill pleased that such ideas should be put into Meg's innocent
mind.

     "Well, if that isn't the greatest rubbish I ever heard," cried
Jo indignantly.  "Why didn't you pop out and tell them so on the
spot?'

     "I couldn't, it was so embarrassing for me.  I couldn't help
hearing at first, and then I was so angry and ashamed, I didn't
remember that I ought to go away."

     "Just wait till I see Annie Moffat, and I'll show you how to
settle such ridiculous stuff.  The idea of having `plans' and being
kind to Laurie because he's rich and may marry us by-and-by!  Won't
he shout when I tell him what those silly things say about us poor
children?"  And Jo laughed, as if on second thoughts the thing
struck her as a good joke.

     "If you tell Laurie, I'll never forgive you!  She mustn't,
must she, Mother?"  said Meg, looking distressed.

     "No, never repeat that foolish gossip, and forget it as soon
as you can," said Mrs. March gravely.  "I was very unwise to let
you go among people of whom I know so little, kind, I dare say,
but worldly, ill-bred, and full of these vulgar ideas about young
people.  I am more sorry than I can express for the mischief this
visit may have done you, Meg."

     "Don't be sorry, I won't let it hurt me.  I'll forget all the
bad and remember only the good, for I did enjoy a great deal, and
thank you very much for letting me go.  I'll not be sentimental or
dissatisfied, Mother.  I know I'm a silly little girl, and I'll
stay with you till I'm fit to take care of myself.  But it is nice
to be praised and admired, and I can't help saying I like it," said
Meg, looking half ashamed of the confession.

     "That is perfectly natural, and quite harmless, if the liking
does not become a passion and lead one to do foolish or unmaidenly
things.  Learn to know and value the praise which is worth having,
and to excite the admiration of excellent people by being modest
as well as pretty, Meg."

     Margaret sat thinking a moment, while Jo stood with her hands
behind her, looking both interested and a little perplexed, for it
was a new thing to see Meg blushing and talking about admiration,
lovers, and things of that sort.  And Jo felt as if during that
fortnight her sister had grown up amazingly, and was drifting away
from her into a world where she could not follow.

     "Mother, do you have `plans', as Mrs. Moffat said?" asked Meg
bashfully.

     "Yes, my dear, I have a great many, all mothers do, but mine
differ somewhat from Mrs. Moffat's, I suspect.  I will tell you
some of them, for the time has come when a word may set this
romantic little head and heart of yours right, on a very serious
subject.  You are young, Meg, but not too young to understand me,
and mothers' lips are the fittest to speak of such things to girls
like you.  Jo, your turn will come in time, perhaps, so listen to
my `plans' and help me carry them out, if they are good."

     Jo went and sat on one arm of the chair, looking as if she
thought they were about to join in some very solemn affair.  Hold-
ing a hand of each, and watching the two young faces wistfully,
Mrs. March said, in her serious yet cheery way . . .

     "I want my daughters to be beautiful, accomplished, and good.
To be admired, loved, and respected.  To have a happy youth, to
be well and wisely married, and to lead useful, pleasant lives,
with as little care and sorrow to try them as God sees fit to send.
To be loved and chosen by a good man is the best and sweetest thing
which can happen to a woman, and I sincerely  hope my girls may
know this beautiful experience.  It is natural to think of it, Meg,
right to hope and wait for it, and wise to prepare for it, so that
when the happy time comes, you may feel ready for the duties and
worthy of the joy.  My dear girls, I am ambitious for you, but not
to have you make a dash in the world, marry rich men merely because
they are rich, or have splendid houses, which are not homes because
love is wanting.  Money is a needful and precious thing, and when
well used, a noble thing, but I never want you to think it is the
first or only prize to strive for.  I'd rather see you poor men's
wives, if you were happy, beloved, contented, than queens on thrones,
without self-respect and peace."

     "Poor girls don't stand any chance, Belle says, unless they
put themselves forward," sighed Meg.

     "Then we'll be old maids," said Jo stoutly.

     "right, Jo.  Better be happy old maids than unhappy wives, or
unmaidenly girls, running about to find husbands," said Mrs. March
decidedly.  "Don't be troubled, Meg, poverty seldom daunts a sincere
lover.  Some of the best and most honored women I know were poor
girls, but so love-worthy that they were not allowed to be old maids.
Leave these things to time.  Make this home happy, so that you may
be fit for homes of your own, if they are offered you, and contented
here if they are not.  One thing remember, my girls.  Mother is
always ready to be your confidante, Father to be your friend, and
both of hope and trust that our daughters, whether married or single,
will be the pride and comfort of out lives."

     "We will, Marmee, we will!" cried both, with all their hearts,
as she bade them good night.

                           CHAPTER TEN

     As spring came on, a new set of amusements became the
fashion, and the lengthening days gave long afternoons for
work and play of all sorts.  The garden had to be put in order,
and each sister had a quarter of the little plot to do what she
liked with.  Hannah used to say, "I'd know which each of them
gardings belonged to, ef I see 'em in Chiny," and so she might,
for the girls' tastes differed as much as their characters. Meg's
had roses and heliotrope, myrtle, and a little orange tree in it.
Jo's bed was never alike two seasons, for she was always trying
experiments.  This year it was to be a plantation of sun flowers,
the seeds of which cheerful land aspiring plant were to feed
Aunt Cockle-top and her family of chicks.  Beth had old-fashioned
fragrant flowers in her garden, sweet peas and mignonette,
larkspur, pinks, pansies, and southernwood, with chickweed for
the birds and catnip for the pussies.  Amy had a bower in hers,
rather small and earwiggy, but very pretty to look at, with
honeysuckle and morning-glories hanging their colored horns and
bells in graceful wreaths all over it, tall white lilies, delicate
ferns, and as many brilliant, picturesque plants as would consent
to blossom there.

     Gardening, walks, rows on the river, and flower hunts em-
ployed the fine days, and for rainy ones, they had house diver-
sions, some old, some new, all more or less original.  One of
these was the `P.C', for as secret societies were the fashion,
it was thought proper to have one, and as all of the girls
admired Dickens, they called themselves the Pickwick Club.  With
a few interruptions, they had kept this up for a year, and met
every Saturday evening in the big garret, on which occasions the
ceremonies were as follows:  Three chairs were arranged in a row
before a table on which was a lamp, also four white badges, with
a big `P.C.' in different colors on each, and the weekly news-
paper called, THE PICKWICK PORTFOLIO, to which all contributed
something, while Jo, who reveled in pens and ink, was the editor.
At seven o'clock, the four members ascended to the clubroom,
tied their badges round their heads, and took their seats with
great solemnity.  Meg, as the eldest, was Samuel Pickwick, Jo,
being of a literary turn, Augustus Snodgrass, Beth, because she
was round and rosy, Tracy Tupman, and Amy, who was always trying
to do what she couldn't, was Nathaniel Winkle.  Pickwick, the
president, read the paper, which was filled with original tales,
poetry, local news, funny advertisements, and hints, in which
they good-naturedly reminded each other of their faults and
short comings.  On one occasion, Mr. Pickwick put on a pair
of spectacles without any glass, rapped upon the table, hemmed,
and having stared hard at Mr. Snodgrass, who was tilting back
in his chair, till he arranged himself properly, began to read:

      ____________________________________________________

                    "THE PICKWICK PORTFOLIO"

     _____________________________________________________

                          MAY 20, 18---
     _____________________________________________________

                          POET'S CORNER
     _____________________________________________________

                         ANNIVERSARY ODE
                            ___________

                    Again we meet to celebrate
                     With badge and solemn rite,
                    Our fifty-second anniversary,
                     In Pickwick Hall, tonight.

                    We all are here in perfect health,
                     None gone from our small band:
                    Again we see each well-known face,
                     And press each friendly hand.

                    Our Pickwick, always at his post,
                     With reverence we greet,
                    As, spectacles on nose, he reads
                     Our well-filled weekly sheet.

                    Although he suffers from a cold,
                     We joy to hear him speak,
                    For words of wisdom from him fall,
                     In spite of croak or squeak.

                    Old six-foot Snodgrass looms on high,
                     With elephantine grace,
                    And beams upon the company,
                     With brown and jovial face.

                    Poetic fire lights up his eye,
                     He struggles 'gainst his lot.
                    Behold ambition on his brow,
                     And on his nose, a blot.

                    Next our peaceful Tupman comes,
                     So rosy, plump, and sweet,
                    Who chokes with laughter at the puns,
                     And tumbles off his seat.

                    Prim little Winkle too is here,
                     With every hair in place,
                    A model of propriety,
                     Though he hates to wash his face.

                    The year is gone, we still unite
                     To joke and laugh and read,
                    And tread the path of literature
                     That doth to glory lead.

                    Long may our paper prosper well,
                     Our club unbroken be,
                    And coming years their blessings pour
                     On the useful, gay `P. C.'.
                                             A. SNODGRASS

                                 ________

                      THE MASKED MARRIAGE
                       (A Tale Of Venice)

          Gondola after gondola swept up to the marble
     steps, and left its lovely load to swell the brill-
     iant throng that filled the stately halls of Count
     Adelon.  Knights and ladies, elves and pages, monks
     and flower girls, all mingled gaily in the dance.
     Sweet voices and rich melody filled the air, and so
     with mirth and music the masquerade went on.
          "Has your Highness seen the Lady viola tonight?"
     asked a gallant troubadour of the fairy queen who
     floated down the hall upon his arm.
          "Yes, is she not lovely, though so sad!  Her
     dress is well chosen, too, for in a week she weds
     Count Antonio, whom she passionately hates."
          "By my faith, I envy him.  Yonder he comes,
     arrayed like a bridegroom, except the black mask.
     When that is off we shall see how he regards the
     fair maid whose heart he cannot win, though her
     stern father bestows her hand," returned the troub-
     adour.
          "Tis whispered that she loves the young English
     artist who haunts her steps, and is spurned by the
     old Count," said the lady, as they joined the dance.
          The revel was at its height when a priest
     appeared, and withdrawing the young pair to an alcove,
     hung with purple velvet, he motioned them to kneel.
     Instant silence fell on the gay throng, and not a
     sound, but he dash of fountains or the rustle of
     orange groves sleeping in the moonlight, broke the
     hush, as Count de Adelon spoke thus:
          "My lords and ladies, pardon the ruse by which
     I have gathered you here to witness the marriage of
     my daughter.  Father, we wait your services."
          All eyes turned toward the bridal party, and a
     murmur of amazement went through the throng, for
     neither bride nor groom removed their masks. Curiosity
     and wonder possessed all hearts, but respect restrained
     all tongues till the holy rite was over.  Then the
     eager spectators gathered round the count, demanding
     an explanation.
          "Gladly would I give it if I could, but I only
     know that it was the whim of my timid Viola, and I
     yielded to it.  Now, my children, let the play end.
     Unmask and receive my blessing."
          But neither bent the knee,for the young bride-
     groom replied in a tone that startled all listeners
     as the mask fell, disclosing the noble face of Ferd-
     inand Devereux, the artist lover, and leaning on the
     breast where now flashed the star of an English earl
     was the lovely Viola, radiant with joy and beauty.
          "My lord, you scornfully bade me claim your
     daughter when I could boast as high a name and vast a
     fortune as the Count antonio.  I can do more, for even
     your ambitious soul cannot refuse the Earl of Devereux
     and De Vere, when he gives his ancient name and bound-
     less wealth in return for the beloved hand of this fair
     lady, now my wife.
          The count stood like one changed to stone, and
     turning to the bewildered crowd, Ferdinand added, with
     a gay smile of triumph, "To you, my gallant friends, I
     can only wish that your wooing may prosper as mine has
     done, and that you may all win as fair a bride as I have
     by this masked marriage."
                                               S. PICKWICK

                             ___________

            Why is the P. C. like the Tower of Babel?
            It is full of unruly members.

                              ___________

                         THE HISTORY OF A SQUASH

                                 _____

          Once upon a time a farmer planted a little seed.
     in his garden, and after a while it sprouted and be-
     came a vine and bore many squashes.  One day in Octo-
     ber, when they were ripe, he picked one and took it
     to market.  A gorcerman bought and put it in his shop.
          That same morning, a little girl in a brown hat
     and blue dress, with a round face and snub nose, went
     and bought it for her mother.  She lugged it home, cut
     it up, and boiled it in the big pot, mashed some of it
     salt and butter, for dinner.  And to the rest she added
     a pint of milk, two eggs, four spoons of sugar, nutmeg,
     and some crackers, put it in a deep dish, and baked it
     till it was brown and nice, and next day it was eaten
     by a family named March.
                                                 T. TUPMAN

                          _____________

     Mr. Pickwick, Sir:-
          I address you upon the subject of sin the sinner
     I mean is a man named Winkle who makes trouble in his
     club by laughing and sometimes won't write his piece in
     this fine paper I hope you will pardon his badness and
     let him send a French fable because he can't write out
     of his head as he has so many lessons to do and no brains
     in future I will try to take time by the fetlock and
     prepare some work which will be all commy la fo that
     means all right I am in haste as it is nearly school
     time
           Yours respectably,

                                               N. WINKLE

     [The above is a manly and handsome aknowledgment of past
     misdemeanors.  If our young friend studied punctuation, it
     would be well.]

                              _________

                            A SAD ACCIDENT

                              __________

          On Friday last, we were startled by a violent shock
     in our basement, followed by cries of distress. On rush-
     ing in a body to the cellar, we discovered our beloved
     President prostrate upon the floor, having tripped and
     fallen while getting wood for domestic purposes.  A per-
     fect scene of ruin met our eyes, for in his fall Mr.
     Pickwick had plunged his head and shoulders into a tub
     of water, upset a keg of soft soap upon his manly form,
     and torn his garments badly.  On being removed from this
     perilous situation, it was discovered that he had suffered
     no injury but several bruises, and we are happy to add, is
     now doing well.
                                                         ED.

                ______________________________________

                       THE PUBLIC BEREAVEMENT

          It is our painful duty to record the sudden and
     mysterious disappearance of our cherished friend, Mrs.
     Snowball Pat Paw.  This lovely and beloved cat was the
     pet of a large circle of warm and admiring friends; for
     her beauty attracted all eyes, her graces and virtues
     endeared her to all hearts, and her loss is deeply felt
     by the whole community.
          When last seen, she was sitting at the gate, watch-
     ing the butcher's cart, and it is feared that some villain,
     tempted by her charms, basely stole her. Weeks have passed,
     but no trace of her has been discovered, and we relinquish
     all hope, tie a black ribbon to her basket, set aside her
     dish, and weep for her as one lost to us forever.

                               _________

          A sympathizing friend sends the following gem:
                                ________

                                A LAMENT
                           (FOR S. B. PAT PAW)

                We mourn the loss of our little pet,
                  And sigh o'er her hapless fate,
                For never more by the fire she'll sit,
                  Nor play by the old green gate.

                The little grave where her infant sleeps
                  Is 'neath the chestnut tree.
                But o'er her grave we may not weep,
                  We know not where it may be.

                Her empty bed, her idle ball,
                  Will never see her more;
                No gentle tap, no loving purr
                  Is heard at the parlor door.

                Another cat comes after her mice,
                  A cat with a dirty face,
                But she does not hunt as our darling did,
                  Nor play with her airy grace.

                Her stealthy paws tread the very hall
                  Where Snowball used to play,
                But she only spits at the dogs our pet
                  So gallantly drove away.

                She is useful and mild, and does her best,
                  But she is not fair to see,
                And we cannot give her your place dear,
                  Nor worship her as we worship thee.
                                                       A.S.

                 __________________________________________

                               ADVERTISEMENTS
                 __________________________________________

                  Miss Oranthy Bluggage, the accomplished
                  strong-minded lecturer, will deliver her
                  famous lecture on "WOMAN AND HER POSITION"
                  at Pickwick Hall, next Saturday Evening,
                  after the usual performances.

                 ___________________________________________

                  A weekly meeting will be held at Kitchen
                  place, to teach young ladies how to cook.
                  Hannah Brown will preside, and all are
                  invited to attend.

                 ____________________________________________

                  The DUSTPAN SOCIETY will meet on Wednesday
                  next, and parade in the upper story of the
                  Club House.  All members to appear in uniform
                  and shoulder their brooms at nine precisely.

                 ____________________________________________

                  Mrs. Beth Bouncer will open her new assort-
                  ment of Doll's Millinery next week.  The
                  latest Paris fashions have arrived, and
                  orders are respectfully solicited.

                 ____________________________________________

                  A new play will appear at the Barnville
                  Theatre,in the course of a few weeks,which
                  will surpass anything ever seen on the Amer-
                  ican stage.  THE GREEK SLAVE, or CONSTAN-
                  TINE THE AVENGER, is the name of this thrill-
                  ing drama.!!!

                 _____________________________________________

                                     HINTS

                  If S.P. didn't use so much soap on his hands,
                  he wouldn't always be late at breakfast. A.S.
                  is requested not to whistle in the street. T.T
                  please don't forget Amy's napkin.  N.W. must
                  not fret because his dress has not nine tucks.

                 _______________________________________________

                                   WEEKLY REPORT

                                    Meg--Good.
                                    Jo--Bad.
                                    Beth--Very Good.
                                    Amy--Middling.

     ___________________________________________________________________

     As the President finished reading the paper (which I beg
leave to assure my readers is a bona fide copy of one written
by bona fide girls once upon a time), a round of applause
followed, and then Mr. Snodgrass rose to make a proposition.

     "Mr. President and gentlemen," he began, assuming a par-
liamentary attitude and tone, "I wish to propose the admission
of a new member--one who highly deserves the honor, would be
deeply grateful for it, and would add immensely to the spirit
of the club, the literary value of the paper, and be no end
jolly and nice.  I propose Mr. Theodore Laurence as an honorary
member of the P. C.  Come now, do have him."

     Jo's sudden change of tone made the girls laugh, but all
looked rather anxious, and no one said a word as Snodgrass
took his seat.

     "We'll put it to a vote," said the President.  "All in
favor of this motion please to manifest it by saying, `Aye'."

     "Contrary-minded say, `No'."

     Meg and Amy were contrary-minded, and Mr. Winkle rose to
say with great elegance, "We don't wish any boys, they only
joke and bounce about.  This is a ladies' club, and we wish to
be private and proper."

     "I'm afraid he'll laugh at our paper, and make fun of us
afterward," observed Pickwick, pulling the little curl on her
forehead, as she always did when doubtful.

     Up rose Snodgrass, very much in earnest.  "Sir, I give you
my word as a gentleman, Laurie won't do anything of the sort.  He
likes to write, and he'll give a tone to our contributions and
keep us from being sentimental, don't you see?  We can do so little
for him, and he does so much for us, I think the least we can do
is to offer him a place here, and make him welcome if he comes."

     This artful allusion to benefits conferred brought Tupman to
his feet, looking as if he had quite made up his mind.

     "Yes, we ought to do it, even if we are afraid.  I say he may
come, and his grandpa, too, if he likes."

     This spirited burst from Beth electrified the club, and Jo
left her seat to shake hands approvingly.  "Now then, vote again.
Everybody remember it's our Laurie, and say, `Aye!'" cried Snod-
grass excitedly.

     "Aye!  Aye!  Aye!" replied three voices at once.

     "Good!  Bless you!  Now, as there's nothing like `taking time
by the fetlock', as Winkle characteristically observes, allow me
to present the new member."  And, to the dismay of the rest of the
club, Jo threw open the door of the closet, and displayed Laurie
sitting on a rag bag, flushed and twinkling with suppressed laughter.

     "You rogue!  You traitor!  Jo, how could you?" cried the three
girls, as Snodgrass led her friend triumphantly forth, and producing
both a chair and a badge, installed him in a jiffy.

     "The coolness of you two rascals is amazing," began Mr. Pick-
wick, trying to get up an awful frown and only succeeding in pro-
ducing an amiable smile.  But the new member was equal to the
occasion, and rising, with a grateful salutation to the Chair, said
in the most engaging manner, "Mr. President and ladies--I beg pardon,
gentlemen--allow me to introduce myself as Sam Weller, the very
humble servant of the club."

     "Good!  Good!" cried Jo, pounding with the handle of the old
warming pan on which she leaned.

     "My faithful friend and noble patron," continued Laurie with
a wave of the hand, "who has so flatteringly presented me, is not
to be blamed for the base stratagem of tonight.  I planned it, and
she only gave in after lots of teasing."

     "Come now, don't lay it all on yourself.  You know I proposed
the cupboard," broke in Snodgrass, who was enjoying the joke
amazingly.

     "Never mind what she says.  I'm the wretch that did it, sir,"
said the new member, with a Welleresque nod to Mr. Pickwick.  "But
on my honor, I never will do so again, and henceforth devote myself
to the interest of this immortal club."

     "Hear!  Hear!" cried Jo, clashing the lid of the warming pan
like a cymbal.

     "Go on, go on!" added Winkle and Tupman, while the President
bowed benignly.

     "I merely wish to say, that as a slight token of my gratitude
for the honor done me, and as a means of promoting friendly relations
between adjoining nations, I have set up a post office in the hedge
in the lower corner of the garden, a fine, spacious building with
padlocks on the doors and every convenience for the mails, also the
females, if I may be allowed the expression.  It's the old martin
house, but I've stopped up the door and made the roof open, so it
will hold all sorts of things, and save our valuable time.  Letters,
manuscripts, books, and bundles can be passed in there, and as each
nation has a key, it will be uncommonly nice, I fancy.  Allow me to
present the club key, and with many thanks for your favor, take my
seat."

     Great applause as Mr. Weller deposited a little key on the
table and subsided, the warming pan clashed and waved wildly, and
it was some time before order could be restored.  A long discussion
followed, and everyone came out surprising, for everyone did her
best.  So it was an unusually lively meeting, and did not adjourn
till a late hour, when it broke up with three shrill cheers for the
new member.  No one ever regretted the admittance of Sam Weller, for
a more devoted, well-behaved, and jovial member no club could have.
He certainly did add `spirit' to the meetings, and `a tone' to the
paper, for his orations convulsed his hearers and his contributions
were excellent, being patriotic, classical, comical, or dramatic,
but never sentimental.  Jo regarded them as worthy of Bacon, Milton,
or Shakespeare, and remodeled her own works with good effect, she
thought.

     The P. O. was a capital little institution, and flourished
wonderfully, for nearly as many queer things passed through it as
through the real post office.  Tragedies and cravats, poetry and
pickles, garden seeds and long letters, music and gingerbread,
rubbers, invitations, scoldings, and puppies.  The old gentleman
liked the fun, and amused himself by sending odd bundles, mys-
terious messages, and funny telegrams, and his gardener, who was
smitten with Hannah's charms, actually sent a love letter to Jo's
care.  How they laughed when the secret came out, never dreaming
how many love letters that little post office would hold in the
years to come.

                         CHAPTER ELEVEN

     "The first of June!  The Kings are off to the seashore to-
morrow, and I'm free.  Three months' vacation--how I shall enjoy
it!" exclaimed Meg, coming home one warm day to find Jo laid
upon the sofa in an unusual state of exhaustion, while Beth took
off her dusty boots, and Amy made lemonade for the refreshment
of the whole party.

     "Aunt March went today, for which, oh, be joyful!" said
Jo.  "I was mortally afraid she'd ask me to go with her.  If she
had,I should have felt as if I ought to do it, but Plumfield is
about as gay as a churchyard, you know, and I'd rather be excused.
We had a flurry getting the old lady off, and I had a fright every
time she spoke to me, for I was in such a hurry to be through that
I was uncommonly helpful and sweet, and feared she'd find it im-
possible to part from me.  I quaked till she was fairly in the
carriage, and had a final fright, for as it drove of, she popped
out her head, saying, `Josyphine, won't you--?' I didn't hear any
more, for I basely turned and fled.  I did actually run, and
whisked round the corner whee I felt safe."

     "Poor old Jo!  She came in looking as if bears were after her,"
said Beth, as she cuddled her sister's feet with a motherly air.

     "Aunt March is a regular samphire, is she not?" observed Amy,
tasting her mixture critically.

     "She means vampire, not seaweed,but it doesn't matter. It's
too warm to be particular about one's parts of speech," murmured
Jo.

     "What shall you do all your vacation?"  asked Amy, changing
the subject with tact.

     "I shall lie abed late, and do nothing," replied Meg, from
the depths of the rocking chair.  "I've been routed up early all
winter and had to spend my days working for other people, so now
I'm going to rest and revel to my heart's content."

     "No," said Jo, "that dozy way wouldn't suit me.  I've laid
in a heap of books, and I'm going to improve my shining hours
reading on my perch in the old apple tree, when I'm not having
l. . ."

     "Don't say `larks!'" implored Amy, as a return snub for the
samphire' correction.

     "I'll say `nightingales' then, with Laurie.  That's proper
and appropriate, since he's a warbler."

     "Don't let us do any lessons, Beth, for a while, but play
all the time and rest, as the girls mean to," proposed Amy.

     "Well, I will,if Mother doesn't mind.  I want to learn some
new songs, and my children need fitting up for the summer.  They
are dreadfully out of order and really suffering for clothes."

     "May we, Mother?"  asked Meg, turning to Mrs. March, who
sat sewing in what they called `Marmee's corner'.

     "You may try your experiment for a week and see how you like
it.  I think by Saturday night you will find that all play and no
work is as bad as all work and no play."

     "Oh, dear, no!  It will be delicious, I'm sure," said Meg
complacently.

     "I now propose a toast, as my `friend and pardner, Sairy
Gamp', says.  Fun forever, and no grubbing!" cried Jo, rising,
glass in hand, as the lemonade went round.

     They all drank it merrily, and began the experiment by
lounging for the rest of the day.  Next morning, Meg did not
appear till ten o'clock.  Her solitary breakfast did not taste
nice, and the room seemed lonely and untidy, for Jo had not
filled the vases, Beth had not dusted, and Amy's books lay
scattered about.  Nothing was neat and pleasant but `Marmee's
corner', which looked as usual.  And there Meg sat, to `rest and
read', which meant to yawn and imagine what pretty summer dresses
she would get with her salary.  Jo spent the morning on the river
with Laurie and the afternoon reading and crying over THE WIDE,
WIDE WORLD, up in the apple tree.  Beth began by rummaging every-
thing out of the big closet where her family resided, but getting
tired before half done, she left her establishment topsy-turvy
and went to her music, rejoicing that she had no dishes to wash.
Amy arranged her bower, put on her best white frock, smoothed her
curls, and sat down to draw under the honeysuckle, hoping someone
would see and inquire who the young artist was.  As no one appeared
but an inquisitive daddy-longlegs, who examined her work with
interest, she went to walk, got caught in a shower, and came home
dripping.

     At teatime they compared notes, and all agreed that it had
been a delightful, though unusually long day.  Meg, who went shop-
ping in the afternoon and got a `sweet blue muslin, had discovered,
after she had cut the breadths off, that it wouldn't wash, which
mishap made her slightly cross.  Jo had burned the skin off her
nose boating, and got a raging headache by reading too long.  Beth
was worried by the confusion of her closet and the difficulty of
learning three or four songs at once, and Amy deeply regretted the
damage done her frock, for Katy Brown's party was to be the next
day and now like Flora McFlimsey, she had `nothing to wear'.  But
these were mere trifles, and they assured their mother that the
experiment was working finely.  She smiled, said nothing, and with
Hannah's help did their neglected work, keeping home pleasant and
the domestic machinery running smoothly. It was astonishing what
a peculiar and uncomfortable state of things was produced by the
`resting and reveling' process.  The days kept getting longer and
longer, the weather was unusually variable and so were tempers, and
unsettled feeling possessed everyone, and Satan found plenty of
mischief for the idle hands to do.  As the height of luxury, Meg
put out some of her sewing, and then found time hang so heavily that
she fell to snipping and spoiling her clothes in her attempts to
furbish them up a`la Moffat.  Jo read till her eyes gave out and
she was sick of books, got so fidgety that even good-natured Laurie
had a quarrel with her, and so reduced in spirits that she desper-
ately wished she had gone with Aunt March.  Beth got on pretty well,
for she was constantly forgetting that it was to be all play and
no work, and fell back into her old ways now and then.  But something
in the air affected her, and more than once her tranquility was much
disturbed, so much so that on one occasion she actually shook poor
dear Joanna and told her she was a fright'.  Amy fared worst of all,
for her resources were small, and when her sisters left her to amuse
herself, she soon found that accomplished and important little self
a great burden.  She didn't like dolls, fairy tales were childish,
and one couldn't draw all the time.  Tea parties didn't amount to
much neither did picnics unless very well conducted.  "If one could
have a fine house, full of nice girls, or go traveling, the summer
would be delightful, but to stay at home with three selfish sisters
and a grown-up boy was enough to try the patience of a Boaz," com-
plained Miss Malaprop, after several days devoted to pleasure,
fretting, and ennui.

     No one would own that they were tired of the experiment, but
by Friday night each acknowledged to herself that she was glad the
week was nearly done.  Hoping to impress the lesson more deeply,
Mrs. March, who had a good deal of humor, resolved to finish off
the trial in an appropriate manner, so she gave Hannah a holiday and
let the girls enjoy the full effect of the play system.

     When they got up on Saturday morning, there was no fire in
the kitchen, no breakfast in the dining room, and no mother any-
where to be seen.

     "Mercy on us!  What has happened?" cried Jo, staring about
her in dismay.

     Meg ran upstairs and soon came back again, looking relieved
but rather bewildered, and a little ashamed.

     "Mother isn't sick, only very tired, and she says she is
going to stay quietly in her room all day and let us do the best
we can.  It's a very queer thing for her to do, she doesn't act
a bit like herself.  But she says it has been a hard week for
her, so we mustn't grumble but take care of ourselves."

     "That's easy enough, and I like the idea, I'm aching for
something to do, that is, some new amusement, you know," added
Jo quickly.

     In fact it was an immense relief to them all to have a little
work, and they took hold with a will, but soon realized the truth
of Hannah's saying, "Housekeeping ain't no joke."  There was plenty
of food in the larder, and while Beth and Amy set the table, Meg and
Jo got breakfast, wondering as they did why servants ever talked
about hard work.

     "I shall take some up to Mother, though she said we were not
to think of her, for she'd take care of herself," said Meg, who
presided and felt quite matronly behind the teapot.

     So a tray was fitted out before anyone began, and taken up
with the cook's compliments.  The boiled tea was very bitter, the
omelet scorched, and the biscuits speckled with saleratus, but
Mrs. March received her repast with thanks and laughed heartily
over it after Jo was gone.

     "Poor little souls, they will have a hard time, I'm afraid,
but they won't suffer, and it will do them good," she said, pro-
ducing the more palatable viands with which she had provided
herself, and disposing of the bad breakfast, so that their feel-
ings might not be hurt, a motherly  little deception for which
they were grateful.

     Many were the complaints below, and great the chagrin of
the head cook at her failures.  "Never mind, I'll get the dinner
and be servant, you be mistress, keep your hands nice, see
company, and give orders," said Jo, who knew still less than Meg,
about culinary affairs.

     This obliging offer was gladly accepted, and Margaret retired
to the parlor, which she hastily put in order by whisking the
litter under the sofa and shutting the blinds to save the trouble
of dusting.  Jo, with perfect faith in her own powers and a
friendly desire to make up the quarrel, immediately put a note in
the office, inviting Laurie to dinner.

     "You'd better see what you have got before you think of having
company," said Meg, when informed of the hospitable but rash act.

     "Oh, there's corned beef and plenty of poatoes, and I shall
get some asparagus and a lobster, `for a relish', as Hannah says.
We'll have lettuce and make a salad.  I don't know how, but the
book tells.  I'll have blancmange and strawberries for dessert,
and coffee too, if you want to be elegant."

     "Don't try too many messes, Jo, for you can't make anything
but gingerbread and molasses candy fit to eat.  I wash my hands
of the dinner party, and since you have asked Laurie on your own
responsibility, you may just take care of him."

     "I don't want you to do anything but be civil to him and help
to the pudding.  You'll give me your advice if I get in a muddle,
won't you?" asked Jo, rather hurt.

     "Yes, but I don't know much, except about bread and a few
trifles.  You had better ask Mother's leave before you order any-
thing," returned Meg prudently.

     "Of course I shall.  I'm not a fool."  And Jo went off in a
huff at the doubts expressed of her powers.

     "Get what you like, and don't disturb me.  I'm going out to
dinner and can't worry about things at home," said Mrs. March, when
Jo spoke to her.  "I never enjoyed housekeeping, and I'm going to
take a vacation today, and read, write, go visiting, and amuse
myself."

     The unusual spectacle of her busy mother rocking comfortably
and reading early in the morning made Jo feel as if some unnatural
phenomenon had occurred, for an eclipse, an earthquake, or a vol-
canic eruption would hardly have seemed stranger.

     "Everything is out of sorts, somehow," she said to herself,
going downstairs.  "There's Beth crying, that's a sure sign that
something is wrong in this family.  If Amy is bothering, I'll
shake her."

     Feeling very much out of sorts herself, Jo hurried into the
parlor to find Beth sobbing over Pip, the canary, who lay dead in
the cage with his little claws pathetically extended, as if implor-
ing the food for want of which he had died.

     "It's all my fault, I forgot him, there isn't a seed or a
drop left.  Oh, Pip!  Oh, Pip!  How could I be so cruel to you?"
cried Beth, taking the poor thing in her hands and trying to
restore him.

     Jo peeped into his half-open eye, felt his little heart, and
finding him stiff and cold, shook her head, and offered her domino
box for a coffin.

     "Put him in the oven, and maybe his will get warm and revive,"
said Amy hopefully.

     "He's been starved, and he shan't be baked now he's dead. I'll
make him a shroud, and he shall be buried in the garden, and I'll
never have another bird, never, my Pip!  For I am too bad to own
one," murmured Beth, sitting on the floor with her pet folded in
her hands.

     "The funeral shall be this afternoon, and we will all go.  Now,
don't cry, Bethy.  It's a pity, but nothing goes right this week,
and Pip has had the worst of the experiment.  Make the shroud, and
lay him in my box, and after the dinner party, we'll have a nice
little funeral," said Jo, beginning to feel as if she had undertaken
a good deal.

     Leaving the others to console Beth, she departed to the kitchen,
which was in a most discouraging state of confusion.  Putting on a
big apron, she fell to work and got the dishes piled up ready for
washing, when she discovered that the fire was out.

     "Here's a sweet prospect!"  muttered Jo, slamming the stove
door open, and poking vigorously among the cinders.

     Having rekindled the fire, she thought she would go to market
while the water heated.  The walk revived her spirits, and flattering
herself that she had made good bargins, she trudged home again, after
buying a very young lobster, some very old asparagus, and two boxes
of acid strawberries.  By the time she got cleared up, the dinner
arrived and the stove was red-hot.  Hannah had left a pan of bread
to rise, Meg had worked it up early, set it on the hearth for a
second rising, and forgotten it.  Meg was entertaining Sallie
Gardiner in the parlor, when the door flew open and a floury,crocky,
flushed, and disheveled figure appeared, demanding tartly . . .

     "I say, isn't bread `riz' enough when it runs over the pans?"

     Sallie began to laugh, but Meg nodded and lifted her eyebrows
as high as they would go, which caused the apparition to vanish and
put the sour bread into the oven without further delay.  Mrs. March
went out, after peeping here and there to see how matters went, also
saying a word of comfort to Beth, who sat making a winding sheet,
while the dear departed lay in state in the domino box.  A strange
sense of helplessness fell upon the girls as the gray bonnet van-
ished round the corner, and despair seized them when a few minutes
later Miss Crocker appeared, and said she'd come to dinner.  Now
this lady was a thin, yellow spinster, with a sharp nose and
inquisitive eyes, who saw everything and gossiped about all she saw.
They disliked her, but had been taught to be kind to her, simply
because she was old and poor and had few friends.  So Meg gave her
the easy chair and tried to entertain her, while she asked questions,
critsized everything, and told stories of the people whom she knew.

     Language cannot describe the anxieties, experiences, and exertions
which Jo underwent that morning, and the dinner she served up became a
standing joke.  Fearing to ask any more advice, she did her best alone,
and discovered that something more than energy and good will is necess-
ary to make a cook.  She boiled the asparagus for an hour and was
grieved to find the heads cooked off and the stalks harder than ever.
The bread burned black, for the salad dressing so aggravated her that
she could not make it fit to ear.  The lobster was a scarlet mystery to
her, but she hammered and poked till it was unshelled and its meager
proportions concealed in a grove of lettuce leaves. The potatoes had
to be hurried, not to keep the asparagus waiting, and were not done
at the last. The blancmange was lumpy, and the strawberries not as
ripe as they looked, having been skilfully `deaconed'.

     "Well, they can eat beef and bread and butter, if they are
hungry, only it's mortifying to have to spend your whole morning for
nothing," thought Jo, as she rang the bell half an hour later than
usual, and stood, hot, tired, and dispirited, surveying the feast
spread before Laurie, accustomed to all sorts of elegance, and Miss
Crocker, whose tattling tongue would report them far and wide.

     Poor Jo would gladly have gone under the table, as one thing
after another was tasted and left, while Amy giggled, Meg looked
distressed, Miss Crocker pursed her lips, and Laurie talked and
laughed with all his might to give a cheerful tone to the festive
scene.  Jo's one strong point was the fruit,for she had sugared it
well, and had a pitcher of rich cream to eat with it.  Her hot cheeks
cooled a trifle, and she drew a long breath as the pretty glass
plates went round, and everyone looked graciously at the little rosy
islands floating in a sea of cream.  Miss Crocker tasted first, made
a wry face, and drank some water hastily.  Jo, who refused, thinking
there might not be enough, for they dwindled sadly after the picking
over, glanced at Laurie, but he was eating away manfully, though there
was a slight pucker about his mouth and he kept his eye fixed on his
plate. Amy, who was fond of delicate fare, took a heaping spoonful,
choked, hid her face in her napkin, and left the table precipitately.

     "Oh, what is it?" exclaimed Jo, trembling.

     "Salt instead of sugar, and the cream is sour," replied Meg
with a tragic gesture.

     Jo uttered a groan and fell back in her chair, remembering that
she had given a last hasty powdering to the berries out of one of
the two boxes on the kitchen table, and had neglected to put the
milk in the refrigerator.  She turned scarlet and was on the verge
of crying, when she met Laurie's eyes, which would look merry in
spite of his heroic efforts.  The comical side of the affair suddenly
struck her, and she laughed till the tears ran down her cheeks.  So
did everyone else, even `Croaker' as the girls called the old lady,
and the unfortunate dinner ended gaily, with bread and butter, olives
and fun.

     "I haven't strength of mind enough to clear up now, so we will
sober ourselves with a funeral," said Jo, as they rose, and Miss
Crocker made ready to go, being eager to tell the new story at
another friend's dinner table.

     They did sober themselves for Beth's sake.  Laurie dug a grave
under the ferns in the grove, little Pip was laid in, with many tears
by his tender-hearted mistress, and covered with moss, while a wreath
of violets and chickweed was hung on the stone which bore his epitaph,
composed by Jo while she struggled with the dinner.

                     Here lies Pip March,
                     Who died the 7th of June;
                     Loved and lamented sore,
                     And not forgotten soon.

     At the conclusion of the ceremonies, Beth retired to her room,
overcome with emotion and lobster, but there was no place of repose,
for the beds were not made, and she found her grief much assuaged
by beating up the pillows and putting things in order.  Meg helped
Jo clear away the remains of the feast, which took half the afternoon
and left them so tired that they agreed to be contented with tea and
toast for supper.

     Laurie took Amy to drive, which was a deed of charity, for the
sour cream seemed to have had a bad effect upon her temper.  Mrs.
March came home to find the three older girls hard at work in the
middle of the afternoon, and a glance at the closet gave her an idea
of the success of one part of the experiment.

     Before the housewives could rest, several people called, and
there was a scramble to get ready to see them.  Then tea must be got,
errands done, and one or two necessary bits of sewing neglected until
the last minute.  As twilight fell, dewy and still, one by one they
gathered on the porch where the June roses were budding beautifully,
and each groaned or sighed as she sat down, as if tired or troubled.

     "What a dreadful day this has been!" began Jo, usually the first
to speak.

     "It has seemed shorter than usual, but so uncomfortable," said
Meg.

     "Not a bit like home," added Amy.

     "It can't seem so without Marmee and little Pip," sighed Beth,
glancing with full eyes at the empty cage above her head.

     "Here's Mother, dear, and you shall have another bird tomorrow,
if you want it."

     As she spoke, Mrs. March came and took her place among them,
looking as if her holiday had not been much pleasanter than theirs.

     "Are you satisfied with your experiment, girls, or do you want
another week of it?" she asked, as Beth nestled up to her and the
rest turned toward her with brightening faces, as flowers turn
toward the sun.

     "I don't!" cried Jo decidedly.

     "Nor I," echoed the others.

     "You think then, that it is better to have a few duties and
live a little for others, do you?"

     "Lounging and larking doesn't pay," observed Jo, shaking her
head.  "I'm tired of it and mean to go to work at something right
off."

     "Suppose you learn plain cooking.  That's a useful accomplish-
ment, which no woman should be without," said Mrs. March, laughing
inaudibly at the recollection of Jo's dinner party,, for she had
met Miss Crocker and heard her account of it.

     "Mother, did you go away and let everything be, just to see how
we'd get on?" cried Meg, who had had suspicions all day.

     "Yes, I wanted you to see how the comfort of all depends on
each doing her share faithfully.  While Hannah and I did your work,
you got on pretty well, though I don't think you were very happy
or amiable.  So I thought, as a little lesson, I would show you
what happens when everyone thinks only of herself.  Don't you feel
that it is pleasanter to help one another, to have daily duties
which make leisure sweet when it comes, and to bear and forbear,
that home may be comfortable and lovely to us all?"

     "We do, Mother we do!" cried the girls.

     "Then let me advise you to take up your little burdens again,
for though they seem heavy sometimes, they are good for us, and
lighten as we learn to carry them.  Work is wholesome, and there
is plenty for everyone.  It keeps us from ennui and mischief, is
good for health and spirits, and gives us a sense of power and
independence better than money or fashion."

     "We'll work like bees, and love it too, see if we don't,"
said Jo.  "I'll learn plain cooking for my holiday task, and the
dinner party I have shall be a success."

     "I'll make the set of shirts for father, instead of letting
you do it, Marmee.  I can and I will, though I'm not fond of sewing.
That will be better than fussing over my own things, which are plenty
nice enough as they are." said Meg.

     "I'll do my lessons every day, and not spend so much time with
my music and dolls.  I am a stupid thing, and ought to be studying,
not playing," was Beth's resolution, while Amy followed their example
by heroically declaring, "I shall learn to make buttonholes, and
attend to my parts of speech."

     "Very good!  Then I am quite satisfied with the experiment, and
fancy that we shall not have to repeat it, only don't go to the other
extreme and delve like slaves.  Have regular hours for work and play,
make each day both useful and pleasant, and prove that you understand
the worth of time by employing it well.  Then youth will be delightful,
old age will bring few regrets, and life become a beautiful success, in
spite of poverty."

     "We'll remember, Mother!"   And they did.

                          CHAPTER TWELVE

     Beth was postmistress, for, being most at home, she could
attend to it regularly, and dearly liked the daily task of un-
locking the little door and distributing the mail.  One July day
she came in with her hands full, and went about the house leaving
letters and parcels like the penny post.

     "Here's your posy, Mother!  Laurie never forgets that," she
said, putting the fresh nosegay in the vase that stood in `Marmee's
corner', and was kept supplied by the affectionate boy.

     "Miss Meg March, one letter and a glove," continued Beth,
delivering the articles to her sister, who sat near her mother,
stitching wristbands.

     "Why, I left a pair over there, and here is only one," said
Meg, looking at the gray cotton glove.  "Didn't you drop the
other in the garden?"

     "No, I'm sure I didn't, for there was only one in the office."

     "I hate to have odd gloves!  Never mind, the other may be
found.  My letter is only a translation of the German song I
wanted.  I think Mr. Brooke did it, for this isn't Laurie's
writing."

     Mrs. March glanced at Meg, who was looking very pretty in
her gingham morning gown, with the little curls blowing about her
forehead, and very womanly, as she sat sewing at her little work-
table, full of tidy white rolls, so unconscious of the thought in
her mother's mind as she sewed and sang, while her fingers flew
and her thoughts were busied with girlish fancies as innocent
and fresh as the pansies in her belt, that Mrs. March smiled and
was satisfied.

     "Two letters for Doctor Jo, a book, and a funny old hat,
which covered the whole post office and stuck outside," said
Beth, laughing as she went into the study where Jo sat writing.

     "What a sly fellow Laurie is!  I said I wished bigger hats
were the fashion, because I burn my face every hot day.  He said,
`Why mind the fashion?  Wear a big hat, and be comfortable!'  I
said I would if I had one, and he has sent me this to try me. I'll
wear it for fun, and show him I don't care for the fashion."  And
hanging the antique broadbrim on a bust of Plato, Jo read her
letters.

     One from her mother made her cheeks glow and her eyes fill,
for it said to her . . .

     My Dear:

     I write a little word to tell you with how much satisfaction
I watch your efforts to control your temper.  You say nothing
about your trials, failures, or successes, and think, perhaps,
that no one sees them but the Friend whose help you daily ask,
if I may trust the well-worn cover of your guidebook.  I, too,
have seen them all, and heartily believe in the sincerity of
your resolution, since it begins to bear fruit.  Go on, dear,
patiently and bravely, and always believe that no one sympa-
thizes more tenderly with you than your loving  . . .
                                                 Mother

     "That does me good!  That's worth millions of money and
pecks of praise.  Oh, Marmee, I do try!  I will keep on trying,
and not get tired, since I have you to help me."

     Laying her head on her arms, Jo wet her little romance with
a few happy tears. for she had thought that no one saw and appre-
ciated her efforts to be good, and this assurance was doubly
precious, doubly encouraging, because unexpected and from the
person whose commendation she most valued.  Feeling stronger than
ever to meet and subdue her Apollyon, she pinned the note inside her
frock, as a shield and a reminder, lest she be taken unaware, and
proceeded to open her other letter, quite ready for either good or
bad news.  In a big, dashing hand, Laurie wrote . . .

                            Dear Jo,
                            What ho!

     Some english girls and boys are coming to see me tomorrow
and I want to have a jolly time.  If it's fine, I'm going to pitch
my tent in Longmeadow, and row up the whole crew to lunch and
croquet--have a fire, make messes, gypsy fashion, and all sorts
of larks.  They are nice people, and like such things.  Brooke will
go to keep us boys steady, and Kate Vaughn will play propriety for
the girls.  I want you all to come, can't let Beth off at any price,
and nobody shall worry her.  Don't bother about rations, I'll see
to that and everything else, only do come, there's a good fellow!

                        In a tearing hurry,
                        Yours ever, Laurie.

     "Here's richness!" cried Jo, flying in to tell the news to
Meg.

     "Of course we can go, Mother?  It will be such a help to
Laurie, for I can row, and Meg see to the lunch, and the children
be useful in some way."

     "I hope the Vaughns are not fine grown-up people.  Do you
know anything about them, Jo?" asked Meg.

     "Only that there are four of them.  Kate is older than you,
Fred and Frank (twins) about my age, and a little girl (Grace), who
is nine or ten.  Laurie knew them abroad, and liked the boys.  I
fancied, from the way he primmed up his mouth in speaking of her,
that he didn't admire Kate much."

     "I'm so glad my French print is clean, it's just the thing
and so becoming!" observed Meg complacently.  "Have you anything
decent, Jo?"

     "Scarlet and gray boating suit, good enough for me.  I shall
row and tramp about, so I don't want any starch to think of. You'll
come, Betty?"

     "If you won't let any boys talk to me."

     "Not a boy!"

     "I like to please Laurie, and I'm not afraid of Mr. Brooke,
he is so kind.  But I don't want to play, or sing, or say anything.
I'll work hard and not trouble anyone, and you'll take care of me,
Jo, so I'll go."

     "That's my good girl.  You do try to fight off your shyness,
and I love you for it. Fighting faults isn't easy, as I know, and
a cheery word kind of gives a lift.  Thank you, Mother," And Jo
gave the thin cheek a grateful kiss, more precious to Mrs. March
than if it had given back the rosy roundness of her youth.

     "I had a box of chocolate drops, and the picture I wanted to
copy," said Amy, showing her mail.

     "And I got a note from Mr. Laurence, asking me to come over
and play to him tonight, before the lamps are lighted, and I shall
go," added Beth, whose friendship with the old gentleman prospered
finely.

     "Now let's fly round, and do double duty today, so that we can
play tomorrow with free minds," said Jo, preparing to replace her
pen with a broom.

     When the sun peeped into the girls' room early next morning
to promise them a fine day, he saw a comical sight.  Each had
made such preparation for the fete as seemed necessary and proper.
Meg had an extra row of little curlpapers across her forehead, Jo
had copiously anointed her afflicted face with cold cream, Beth
had taken Joanna to bed with her to atone for the approaching
separation, and Amy had capped the climax by putting a colthespin
on her nose to uplift the offending feature.  It was one of the
kind artists use to hold the paper on their drawing boards,there-
fore quite appropriate and effective for the purpose it was now
being put.  This funny spectacle appeared to amuse the sun, for
he burst out with such radiance that Jo woke up and roused her
sisters by a hearty laugh at Amy's ornament.

     Sunshine and laughter were good omens for a pleasure party,
and soon a lively bustle began in both houses. Beth, who was
ready first, kept reporting what went on next door, and enlivened
her sisters' toilets by frequent telegrams from the window.

     "There goes the man with the tent!  I see Mrs. Barker doing
up the lunch in a hamper and a great basket.  Now Mr. Laurence is
looking up at the sky and the weathercock.  I wish he would go
too.  There's Laurie, looking like a sailor, nice boy!  Oh, mercy
me!  Here's a carriage full of people, a tall lady, a little girl,
and two dreadful boys.  One is lame, poor thing, he's got a crutch.
Laurie didn't tell us that.  Be quick, girls!  It's getting late.
Why, there is Ned Moffat, I do declare.  Meg, isn't that the man
who bowed to you one day when we were shopping?"

     "So it is.  How queer that he should come.  I thought he was
at the mountains.  There is Sallie.  I'm glad she got back in time.
Am I all right, Jo?" cried Meg  in a flutter.

     "A regular daisy.  Hold up your dress and put your hat on
straight, it looks sentimental tipped that way and will fly off
at the first puff.  Now then, come on!"

     "Oh, Jo, you are not going to wear that awful hat?  It's too
absurd!  You shall not make a guy  of yourself," remonstrated Meg,
as Jo tied down with a red ribbon the broad-brimmed, old-fashioned
leghorn Laurie had sent for a joke.

     "I just will, though, for it's capital, so shady, light, and
big.  It will make fun, and I don't mind being a guy if I'm comfor-
table."  With that Jo marched straight away and the rest followed,
a bright little band of sisters, all looking their best in summer
suits, with happy faces under the jaunty hatbrims.

     Laurie ran to meet and present them to his friends in the
most cordial manner.  The lawn was the reception room, and for
several minutes a lively scene was enacted there.  Meg was
grateful to see that Miss Kate, though twenty, was dressed with
a simplicity which American girls would do well to imitate, and
who was much flattered by Mr. Ned's assurances that he came
especially to see her.  Jo understood why Laurie `primmed up his
mouth' when speaking of Kate, for that young lady had a stand-
off-don't-touch-me air, which contrasted strongly with the free
and easy demeanor of the other girls.  Beth took an observation
of the new boys and decided that the lame one was not `dreadful',
but gentle and feeble, and she would be kind to him on that
account.  Amy found Grace a well-mannered, merry, little person,
and after staring dumbly at one another for a few minutes, they
suddenly became very good friends.

     Tents, lunch, and croquet utensils having been sent on
beforehand, the party was soon embarked, and the two boats
pushed off together, leaving Mr. Laurence waving his hat on the
shore.  Laurie and Jo rowed one boat, Mr. Brooke and Ned the
other, while Fred Vaughn, the riotous twin, did his best to
upset both by paddling about in a wherry like a disturbed water
bug.  Jo's funny hat deserved a vote of thanks, for it was of
general utility.  It broke the ice in the beginning by producing
a laugh, it created quite a refreshing breeze, flapping to and
fro as she rowed, and would make an excellent umbrella for the
whole party, if a shower came up, she said.  Miss Kate decided
that she was `odd', but rather clever, and smiled upon her from
afar.

     Meg, in the other boat, was delightfully situated, face to
face with the rowers, who both admired the prospect and feathered
their oars with uncommon `skill and dexterity'.  Mr. Brooke was
a grave, silent young man, with handsome brown eyes and a pleasant
voice. Meg liked his quiet manners and considered him a walking
encyclopedia of useful knowledge.  He never talked to her much, but
he looked at her a good deal, and she felt sure that he did not
regard her with aversion.  Ned, being in college, of course put
on all the airs which freshmen think it their bounden duty to
assume.  He was not very wise, but very good-natured, and altogether
an excellent person to carry on a picnic.  Sallie Gardiner was
absorbed in keeping her white pique dress clean and chattering with
the ubiquitous Fred, who kept Beth in constant terror by his pranks.

     It was not far to Longmeadow, but the tent was pitched and
the wickets down by the time they arrived.  A pleasant green field,
with three wide-spreading oaks in the middle and a smooth strip of
turf for croquet.

     "Welcome to Camp Laurence!" said the young host, as they
landed with exclamations of delight.

     "Brooke is commander in chief, I am commissary general, the
other fellows are staff officers, and you, ladies, are company.
The tent is for your especial benefit and that oak is your drawing
room, this is the messroom and the third is the camp kitchen. Now,
let's have a game before it gets hot, and then we'll see about
dinner."

     Frank, Beth, Amy, and Grace sat down to watch the game
played by the other eight.  Mr. Brooke chose Meg, Kate, and Fred.
Laurie took Sallie, Jo, and Ned.  The English played well, but
the Americans played better, and contested every inch of the
ground as strongly as if the spirit of `76 inspired them.  Jo and
Fred had several skirmishes and once narrowly escaped high words.
Jo was through the last wicket and had missed the stroke, which
failure ruffled her a good deal.  Fred was close behind her and
his turn came before hers.  He gave a stroke, his ball hit the
wicket, and stopped an inch on the wrong side.  No one was very
near, and running up to examine, he gave it a sly nudge with his
toe, which put it just an inch on the right side.

     "I'm through!  Now, Miss Jo, I'll settle you, and get in
first," cried the young gentleman, swinging his mallet for another
blow.

     "You pushed it.  I saw you.  It's my turn now," said Jo
sharply.

     "Upon my word, I didn't move it.  It rolled a bit, perhaps,
but that is allowed.  So, stand off please, and let me have a go
at the stake."

     "We don't cheat in America, but you can, if you choose," said
Jo angrily.

     "Yankees are a deal the most tricky, everybody knows.  There
you go!" returned Fred, croqueting her ball far away.

     Jo opened her lips to say something rude, but checked herself
in time, colored up to her forehead and stood a minute, hammering
down a wicket with all her might, while Fred hit the stake and
declared himself out with much exultation.  She went off to get her
ball, and was a long time finding it among the bushes, but she came
back, looking cool and quiet, and waited her turn patiently.  It
took several strokes to regain the place she had lost, and when she
got there, the other side had nearly won, for Kate's ball was the
last but one and lay near the stake.

     "By George, it's all up with us!  Goodbye, Kate.  Miss Jo
owes me one, so you are finished," cried Fred excitedly, as they
all drew near to see the finish.

     "Yankees have a trick of being generous to their enemies,"
said Jo, with a look that made the lad redden, "especially when
they beat them," she added, as, leaving Kate's ball untouched, she
won the game by a clever stroke.

     Laurie threw up his hat, then remembered that it wouldn't do
to exult over the defeat of his guests, and stopped in the middle
of the cheer to whisper to his friend, "Good for you, Jo!  He did
cheat, I saw him.  We can't tell him so,but he won't do it again,
take my word for it."

     Meg drew her aside, under pretense of pinning up a loose
braid, and said approvingly, "It was dreadfully provoking, but you
kept your temper, and I'm so glad, Jo."

     "Don't praise me, Meg, for I could box his ears this minute.
I should certainly have boiled over if I hadn't stayed among the
nettles till I got my rage under control enough to hold my tongue..
It's simmering now, so I hope he'll keep out of my way," returned
Jo, biting her lips as she glowered at Fred from under her big hat.

     "Time for lunch," said Mr. Brooke, looking at his watch.
"Commissary general, will you make the fire and get water, while
Miss March, Miss Sallie, and I spread the table?  Who can make good
coffee?"

     "Jo can," said Meg, glad to recommend her sister.  So Jo,
feeling that her late lessons in cookery were to do her honor, went
to preside over the coffeepot, while the children collected dry
sticks, and the boys made a fire and got water from a spring near
by.  Miss Kate sketched and Frank talked to Beth, who was making
little mats of braided rushes to serve as plates.

     The commander in chief and his aides soon spread the table-
cloth with an inviting array of eatables and drinkables, prettily
decorated with green leaves.  Jo announced that the coffee was
ready, and everyone settled themselves to a hearty meal, for youth
is seldom dyspeptic, and exercise develops wholesome appetites.  A
very merry lunch it was, for everything seemed fresh and funny, and
frequent peals of laughter startled a venerable horse who fed near
by.  There was a pleasing inequality in the table, which produced
many mishaps to cups and plates, acorns dropped in the milk, little
black ants partook of the refreshments without being invited, and
fuzzy caterpillars swung down from the tree to see what was going
on.  Three white-headed children peeped over the fence, and an
objectionable dog barked at them from the other side of the river
with all his might and main.

     "There's salt here," said Laurie, as he handed Jo a saucer
of berries.

     "Thank you, I prefer spiders," she replied, fishing up two
unwary little ones who had gone to a creamy death.  "How dare
you remind me of that horrid dinner party, when your's is so
nice in every way?' added Jo, as they both laughed and ate out
of one plate, the china having run short.

     "I had an uncommonly good time that day, and haven't got
over it yet.  This is no credit to me, you know, I don't do
anything.  It's you and Meg and Brooke who make it all go, and
I'm no end obliged to you.  what shall we do when we can't eat
anymore?" asked Laurie, feeling that his trump card had been
played when lunch was over.

     "Have games till it's cooler.  I brought Authors, and I dare
say Miss Kate knows something new and nice.  Go and ask her.  She's
company, and you ought to stay with her more."

     "Aren't you company too?  I thought she'd suit Brooke, but
he keeps talking to Meg, and Kate just stares at them through that
ridiculous glass of hers'.  I'm going, so you needn't try to preach
propriety, for you can't do it, Jo."

     Miss Kate did know several new games, and as the girls would
not, and the boys could not, eat any more, they all adjourned to
the drawing room to play Rig-marole.

     "One person begins a story, any nonsense you like, and tells
as long as he pleases, only taking care to stop short at some
exciting point, when the next takes it up and does the same. It's
very funny when well done, and makes a perfect jumble of tragical
comical stuff to laugh over.  Please start it, Mr. Brooke," said
Kate, with a commanding air, which surprised Meg, who treated the
tutor with as much respect as any other gentleman.

     Lying on the grass at the feet of the two young ladies, Mr.
Brooke obediently began the story, with the handsome brown eyes
steadily fixed upon the sunshiny river.

     "Once on a time, a knight went out into the world to seek
his fortune, for he had nothing but his sword and his shield.
He traveled a long while, nearly eight-and-twenty years, and
had a hard time of it, till he came to the palace of a good old
king, who had offered a reward to anyone who could tame and train
a fine but unbroken colt, of which he was very fond.  The knight
agreed to try, and got on slowly but surely, for the colt was a
gallant fellow, and soon learned to love his new master, though
he was freakish and wild.  Every day, when he gave his lessons to
this pet of the king's, the knight rode him through the city, and
as he rode, he looked everywhere for a certain beautiful face,
which he had seen many times in his dreams, but never found.  One
day, as he went prancing down a quiet street, he saw at the window
of a ruinous castle the lovely face.  He was delighted, inquired
who lived in this old castle, and was told that several captive
princesses were kept there by a spell, and spun all day to lay
up money to buy their liberty.  The knight wished intensely that
he could free them, but he was poor and could only go by each
day, watching for the sweet face and longing to see it out in
the sunshine.  At last he resolved to get into the castle and
ask how he could help them.  He went and knocked.  The great
door flew open, and he beheld . .."

     "A ravishingly lovely lady, who exclaimed, with a cry of
rapture, `At last!  At last!'" continued Kate, who had read
French novels, and admired the style.  "`Tis she!' cried Count
Gustave, and fell at her feet in an ecstasy of joy.  `Oh, rise!'
she said, extending a hand of marble fairness. `Never! Till you
tell me how I may rescue you,' swore the knight, still kneeling.
`Alas, my cruel fate condemns me to remain here till my tyrant
is destroyed.'  `Where is the villain?' `In the mauve salon.  Go,
brave heart, and save me from despair.' `I obey, and return
victorious or dead!'  With these thrilling words he rushed away,
and flinging open the door of the mauve salon, was about to enter,
when he received . . ."

     "A stunning blow from the big Greek lexicon, which an old
fellow in a black gown fired at him," said Ned.  "Instantly, Sir
What's-his-name recovered himself, pitched the tyrant out of the
window, and turned to join the lady, victorious, but with a bump
on his brow, found the door locked, tore up the curtains, made a
rope ladder, got halfway down when the ladder broke, and he went
headfirst into the moat, sixty feet below.  Could swim like a
duck, paddled round the castle till he came to a little door
guarded by two stout fellows, knocked their heads together till
they cracked like a couple of nuts, then, by a trifling exertion
of his prodigious strength, he smashed in the door, went up a
pair of stone steps covered with dust a foot thick, toads as big
as your fist, and spiders that would frighten you into hysterics,
MIss March.  At the top of these steps he came plump upon a sight
that took his breath away and chilled his blood . . ."

     "A tall figure, all in white with a veil over its face and a
lamp in its wasted hand," went on Meg.  "It beckoned, gliding
noiselessly before him down a corridor as dark and cold as any
tomb.  Shadowy effigies in armor stood on either side,a dead
silence reigned, the lamp burned blue, and the ghostly figure ever
and anon turned its face toward him, showing the glitter of awful
eyes through its white veil.  They reached a curtained door, behind
which sounded lovely music.  He sprang forward to enter, but the
specter plucked him back, and waved threateningly before him a . . ."

     "Snuffbox," said Jo, in a sepulchral tone, which convulsed the
audience.  "`Thankee,' said the knight politely, as he took a pinch
and sneezed seven times so violently that his head fell off.  `Ha!
Ha!' laughed the ghost, and having peeped through the keyhole at the
princesses spinning away for dear life, the evil spirit picked up
her victim and put him in a large tin box, where there were eleven
other knights packed together without their heads, like sardines,
who all rose and began to . . ."

     "Dance a hornpipe," cut in Fred, as Jo paused for breath, "and,
as they danced, the rubbishy old castle turned to a man-of-war in
full sail. `Up with the jib, reef the tops'l halliards, helm hard
alee, and man the guns!' roared the captain, as a Portuguese pirate
hove in sight, with a flag black as ink flying from her foremast.
`Go in and win, my hearties!' says the captain, and a tremendous
fight began.  Of course the British beat, they always do."

     "No, they don't!" cried Jo, aside.

     "Having taken the pirate captain prisoner, sailed slap over
the schooner, whose decks were piled high with dead and whose
lee scuppers ran blood, for the order had been `Cutlasses, and
die hard!' `Bosun's mate, take a bight of the flying-jib sheet,
and start this villain if he doesn't confess his sins double
quick,' said the British captain.  The Portuguese held his tongue
like a brick, and walked the plank, while the jolly tars cheered
like mad.  But the sly dog dived, came up under the man-of-war,
scuttled her, and down she went, with all sail set, `To the
bottom  of the sea, sea, sea' where . . ."

     "Oh, gracious!  What shall I say?" cried Sallie, as Fred
ended his rigmarole, in which he had jumbled together pell-mell
nautical phrases and facts out of one of his favorite books.
"Well, they went to the bottom, and a nice mermaid welcomed them,
but was much grieved on finding the box of headless knights, and
kindly pickled them in brine, hoping to discover the mystery
about them, for being a woman, she was curious.  By-and-by a diver
came down, and the mermaid said, `I'll give you a box of pearls
if you can take it up,' for she wanted to restore the poor things
to life, and couldn't raise the heavy load herself.  So the diver
hoisted it up, and was much disappointed on opening it to find
no pearls.  He left it in a great lonely field, where it was
found by a . . ."

     "Little goose girl, who kept a hundred fat geese in the field,"
said Amy, when Sallie's invention gave out.  "The little girl was
sorry for them, and asked an old woman what she should do to help
them.  `Your geese will tell you, they know everything.' said the
old woman.  So she asked what she should use for new heads, since
the old ones were lost, and all the geese opened their hundred
mouths and screamed . . ."

     "`Cabbages!'" continued Laurie promptly.  "`Just the thing,'
said the girl, and ran to get twelve fine ones from her garden.
She put them on, the knights revived at once, thanked her, and
went on their way rejoicing, never knowing the difference, for
there were so many other heads like them in the world that no one
thought anything of it.  The knight in whom I'm interest went back
to find the pretty face, and learned that the princesses had spun
themselves free and  all gone and married, but one.  He was in a
great state of mind at that, and mounting the colt, who stood by
him through thick and thin, rushed to the castle to see which was
left.  Peeping over the hedge, he saw the queen of his affections
picking flowers in her garden.  `Will you give me a rose?' said
he.  `You must come and get it.  I can't come to you, it isn't
proper,' said she, as sweet as honey.  He tried to climb over
the hedge, but it seemed to grow higher and higher.  Then he
tried to push through, but it grew thicker and thicker, and he
was in despair.  So he patiently broke twig after twig till he
had made a little hole through which he peeped, saying implor-
ingly, `Let me in!  Let me in!' But the pretty princess did not
seem to understand, for she picked her roses quietly, and left
him to fight his way in. Whether he did or not, Frank will tell
you."

     "I can't.  I'm not playing, I never do," said Frank, dismayed
at the sentimental predicament out of which he was to rescue the
absurd couple.  Beth had disappeared behind Jo, and Grace was
asleep.

     "So the poor knight is to be left sticking in the hedge, is
he?"  asked Mr. Brooke, still watching the river, and playing
with the wild rose in his buttonhole.

     "I guess the princess gave him a posy, and opened the gate
after a while," said Laurie, smiling to himself, as he threw
acorns at his tutor.

     "What a piece of nonsense we have made!  With practice we
might do something quite clever.  Do you know Truth?"

     "I hope so," said Meg soberly.

     "The game, I mean?"

     "what is it?" said Fred.

     "Why, you pile up your hands, choose a number, and draw out
in turn, and the person who draws at the number has to answer
truly any question put by the rest.  It's great fun."

     "Let's try it," said Jo, who liked new experiments.

     Miss Kate and Mr. Booke, Meg, and Ned declined, but Fred,
Sallie, Jo, and Laurie piled and drew, and the lot fell to Laurie.

     "Who are your heroes?" asked Jo.

     "Grandfather and Napoleon."

     "Which lady here do you think prettiest?" said Sallie.

     "Margaret."

     "Which do you like best?" from Fred.

     "Jo, of course."

     "What silly questions you ask!"  And Jo gave a disdainful
shrug as the rest laughed at Laurie's matter-of-fact tone.

     "Try again.  Truth isn't a bad game," said Fred.

     "It's a very good one for you," retorted Jo in a low voice.
Her turn came next.

     "What is your greatest fault?' asked Fred, by way of testing
in her the virtue he lacked himself.

     "A quick temper."

     "What do you most wish for?" said Laurie.

     "A pair of boot lacings," returned Jo, guessing and defeat-
ing his purpose.

     "Not a true answer.  You must say what you really do want
most."

     "Genius.  Don't you wish you could give it to me, Laurie?"
And she slyly smiled in his disappointed face.

     "What virtues do you most admire in a man?" asked Sallie.

     "Courage and honesty."

     "Now my turn," said Fred, as his hand came last.

     "Let's give it to him," whispered Laurie to Jo, who nodded
and asked at once . . .

     "Didn't you cheat at croquet?'

     "Well, yes, a little bit."

     "Good!  Didn't you take your story out of THE SEA LION?"
said Laurie.

     "Rather."

     "Don't you think the English nation perfect in every respect?"
asked Sallie.

     "I should be ashamed of myself if I didn't."

     "He's a true John Bull.  Now, Miss Sallie, you shall have
a chance without waiting to draw.  I'll harrrow up your feelings
first by asking if you don't think you are something of a flirt,"
said Laurie, as Jo nodded to Fred as a sign that peace was declared.

     "You impertinent boy!  Of course I'm not," exclaimed Sallie,
with an air that proved the contrary.

     "What do you hate most?" asked Fred.

     "Spiders and rice pudding."

     "What do you like best?" asked Jo.

     "Dancing and French gloves."

     "Well, I think Truth is a very silly play.  Let's have a
sensible game of Authors to refresh our minds," proposed Jo.

     Ned, frank, and the little girls joined in this, and while it
went on, the three elders sat apart, talking.  Miss Kate took out
her sketch again, and Margaret watched her, while Mr. Brooke lay
on the grass with a book, which he did not read.

     "How beautifully you do it!  I wish I could draw," said Meg,
with mingled admiration and regret in her voice.

     "Why don't you learn?  I should think you had taste and talent
for it," replied Miss Kate graciously.

     "I haven't time."

     "Your mamma prefers other accomplishments, I fancy.  So did
mine, but I proved to her that I had talent by taking a few lessons
privately, and then she was quite willing I should go on.  Can't
you do the same with your governess?"

     "I have none."

     "I forgot young ladies in America go to school more than with
us.  Very fine schools they are, too, Papa says.  You go to a
private one, I suppose?"

     "I don't go at all.  I am a governess myself."

     "Oh. indeed!" said Miss Kate, but she might as well have said,
"Dear me, how dreadful!" for her tone implied it, and something in
her face made Meg color, and wish she had not been so frank.

     Mr. Brooke looked up and said quickly, Young ladies in America
love independence as much as their ancestors did, and are admired
and respected for supporting themselves."

     "Oh, yes, of course it's very nice and proper in them to do
so.  We have many most respectable and worthy young women who do
the same and are employed by the nobility, because, being the
daughters of gentlemen, they are both well bred and accomplished,
you know," said Miss Kate in a patronizing tone that hurt Meg's
pride, and made her work seem not only more distasteful, but
degrading.

     "Did the German song suit, Miss March?" inquired Mr. Brooke,
breaking an awkward pause.

     "Oh, yes!  It was very sweet, and I'm much obliged to who-
ever translated it for me." And Meg's downcast face brightened as
she spoke.

     "Don't you read German?" asked Miss Kate with a look of sur-
prise.

     "Not very well.  My father, who taught me, is away, and I
don't get on very fast alone, for I've no one to correct my
pronunciation."

     "Try a little now.  Here is Schiller's MARY STUART and a
tutor who loves to teach."  And Mr. Brooke laid his book on her
lap with an inviting smile.

     "It's so hard I'm afraid to try," said Meg, grateful, but
bashful in the presence of the accomplished young lady beside
her.

     "I'll read a bit to encourage you." And Miss Kate read one
of the most beautiful passages in a perfectly correct but per-
fectly expressionless manner.

     Mr. Brooke made no comment as she returned the book to Meg,
who said innocently, "I thought it was poetry."

     "Some of it is.  Try this passage."

     There was a queer smile about Mr. Brooke's mouth as he
opened at poor Mary's lament.

     Meg obediently following the long grass-blade which her new
tutor used to point with, read slowly and timidly, unconsciously
making poetry of the hard words by the soft intonation of her
musical voice.  Down the page went the green guide, and presently,
forgetting her listener in the beauty of the sad scene, Meg read
as if alone, giving a little touch of tragedy to the words of the
unhappy queen.  If she had seen the brown eyes then, she would
have stopped short, but she never looked up, and the lesson was
not spoiled for her.

     "Very well indeed!" said Mr. Brooke, as she paused, quite
ignoring her many mistakes, and looking as if he did indeed love
to teach.

     Miss Kate put up her glass, and, having taken a survey of
the little tableau before her, shut her sketch book, saying with
condescension, "You've a nice accent and in time will be a clever
reader.  I advise you to learn, for German is a valuable accom-
plishment to teachers.  I must look after Grace, she is romping."
And Miss Kate strolled away, adding to herself with a shrug, "I
didn't come to chaperone a governess, though she is young and
pretty.  What odd people these Yankees are.  I'm afraid Laurie
will be quite spoiled among them."

     "I forgot that English people rather turn up their noses at
governesses and don't treat them as we do," said Meg, looking
after the retreating figure with an annoyed expression.

     "Tutors also have rather a hard time of it there, as I know
to my sorrow.  There's no place like America for us workers, Miss
Margaret."  And Mr. Brooke looked so contented and cheerful that
Meg was ashamed to lament her hard lot.

     "I'm glad I live in it then.  I don't like my work, but I get
a good deal of satisfaction out of it after all, so I won't com-
plain.  I only wished I liked teaching as you do."

     "I think you would if you had Laurie for a pupil.  I shall
be very sorry to lose him next year," said Mr. Brooke, busily
punching holes in the turf.

     "Going to college, I suppose?" Meg's lips asked the question,
but her eyes added, "And what becomes of you?"

     "Yes, it's high time he went, for he is ready, and as soon as
he is off, I shall turn soldier.  I am needed."

     "I am glad of that!" exclaimed Meg.  "I should think every
young man would want to go, though it is hard for the mothers
and sisters who stay at home," she added sorrowfully.

     "I have neither, and very few friends to care whether I live
or die," said Mr. Brooke rather bitterly as he absently put the
dead rose in the hole he had made and covered it up, like a
little grave.

     "Laurie and his grandfather would care a great deal, and we
should all be very sorry to have any harm happen to you," said
Meg heartily.

     "Thank you, that sounds pleasant," began Mr. Brooke, looking
cheerful again, but before he could finish his speech, Ned, mounted
on the old horse, came lumbering up to display his equestrian skill
before the young ladies, and there was no more quiet that day.

     "Don't you love to ride?" asked Grace of Amy, as they stood
resting after a race round the field with the others, led by Ned.

     "I dote upon it.  My sister, Meg, used to ride when Papa was
rich, but we don't keep any horses now, except Ellen Tree," added
Amy, laughing.

     "Tell me about Ellen Tree.  Is it a donkey?" asked Grace
curiously.

     "Why, you see, Jo is crazy about horses and so am I, but
we've only got an old sidesaddle and no horse.  Out in our
garden is an apple tree that has a nice low branch, so Jo put
the saddle on it, fixed some reins on the part that turns up,
and we bounce away on Ellen Tree whenever we like."

     "How funny!" laughed Grace.  "I have a pony at home, and
ride nearly every day in the park with Fred and Kate.  It's very
nice, for my friends go too, and the Row is full of ladies and
gentlemen."

     "Dear, how charming!  I hope I shall go abroad some day,
but I'd rather go to Rome than the row," said Amy, who had
not the remotest idea what the Row was and wouldn't have asked
for the world.

     Frank, sitting just behind the little girls, heard what they
were saying, and pushed his crutch away from him with an impatient
gesture as he watched the active lads going through all sorts of
comical gymnastics.  Beth, who was collecting the scattered
Author cards, looked up and said, in her shy yet friendly way,
"I'm afraid you are tired.  Can I do anything for you?"

     "Talk to me, please.  It's dull, sitting by myself," answered
Frank, who had evidently been used to being made much of at home.

     If he asked her to deliver a Latin oration, it would not
have seemed a more impossible task to bashful Beth, but there
was no place to run to, no Jo to hide behind now, and the poor
boy looked so wistfully at her that she bravely resolved to try.

     "What do you like to talk about?" she asked, fumbling over
the cards and dropping half as she tried to tie them up.

     "Well, I like to hear about cricket and boating and hunting,"
said Frank, who had not yet learned to suit his amusements to
his strength.

     My heart!  What shall I do?  I don't know anything about them,
thought Beth, and forgetting the boy's misfortune in her flurry,
she said, hoping to make him talk, "I never saw any hunting, but
I suppose you know all about it."

     "I did once, but I can never hunt again, for I got hurt leap-
ing a confounded five-barred gate, so there are no more horses and
hounds for me," said Frank with a sigh that made Beth hate herself
for her innocent blunder.

     "Your deer are much prettier than our ugly buffaloes," she
said, turning to the prairies for help and feeling glad that she
had read one of the boys' books in which Jo delighted.

     Buffaloes proved soothing and satisfactory, and in her eager-
ness to amuse another, Beth forgot herself, and was quite uncon-
scious of her sisters' surprise and delight at the unusual spectacle
of Beth talking away to one of the dreadful boys, against whom she
had begged protection.

     "Bless her heart!  She pities him, so she is good to him,"
said Jo, beaming at her from the croquet ground.

     "I always said she was a little saint," added Meg, as if
there could be no further doubt of it.

     "I haven't heard Frank laugh so much for ever so long," said
Grace to Amy, as they sat discussing dolls and making tea sets
out of the acorn cups.

     "My sister Beth is a very fastidious girl, when she likes to
be," said Amy, well pleased at Beth's success.  She meant `facin-
ating', but as Grace didn't know the exact meaning of either word,
fastidious sounded well and made a good impression.

     An impromptu circus, fox and geese, and an amicable game of
croquet finished the afternoon.  At sunset the tent was struck,
hampers packed, wickets pulled up, boats loaded, and the whole
party floated down the river, singing at the tops of their voices.
Ned, getting sentimental, warbled a serenade with the pensive
refrain . . .

                 Alone, alone, ah! Woe, alone,

and at the lines . . .

                 We each are young, we each have a heart,
                 Oh, why should we stand thus coldly apart?

he looked at Meg with such a lackadiasical expression that she
laughed outright and spoiled his song.

     "How can you be so cruel to me?" he whispered, under cover
of a lively chorus.  "You've kept close to that starched-up
Englishwoman all day, and now you snub me."

     "I didn't mean to, but you looked so funny I really couldn't
help it," replied Meg, passing over the first part of his reproach,
for it was quite true that she had shunned him, remembering the
Moffat party and the talk after it.

     Ned was offended and turned to Sallie for consolation, saying
to her rather pettishly, "There isn't a bit of flirt in that girl,
is there?"

     "Not a particle, but she's a dear," returned Sallie, defending
her friend even while confessing her shortcomings.

     "She's not a stricken deer anyway," said Ned, trying to be
witty, and succeeding as well as very young gentlemen usually do.

     On the lawn where it had gathered, the little party separated
with cordial good nights and good-bys, for the Vaughns were going
to Canada.  As the four sisters went home through the garden, Miss
Kate looked after them, saying, without the patronizing tone in
her voice, "In spite of their demonstrative manners, American girls
are very nice when one knows them."

     "I quite agree with you," said Mr. Brooke.

                      CHAPTER THIRTEEN

     Laurie lay luxuriously swinging to and fro in his hammock
one warm September afternoon, wondering what his neighbors were
about, but too lazy to go and find out.  He was in one of his
moods, for the day had been both unprofitable and unsatisfactory,
and he was wishing he could live it over again.  The hot weather
made him indolent, and he had shirked his studies, tried Mr.
Brooke's patience to the utmost, displeased his grandfather by
practicing half the afternoon, frightened the maidservants half
out of their wits by mischievously hinting that one of his dogs
was going mad, and, after high words with the stableman about
some fancied neglect of his horse, he had flung himself into
his hammock to fume over the stupidity of the world in general,
till the peace of the lovely day quieted him in spite of himself.
Staring up into the green gloom of the horse-chestnut trees above
him, he dreamed dreams of all sorts, and was just imagining him-
self tossing on the ocean in a voyage round the world, when the
sound of voices brought him ashore in a flash.  Peeping through
the meshes of the hammock, he saw the Marches coming out, as if
bound on some expedition.

     "What in the world are those girls about now?" thought
Laurie, opening his sleepy eyes to take a good look, for there
was something rather peculiar in the appearance of his neigh-
bors.  Each wore a large, flapping hat, a brown linen pouch
slung over one shoulder, and carried a long staff.  Meg had a
cushion, Jo a book, Beth a basket, and Amy a portfolio.  All
walked quietly through the garden, out at the little back gate,
and began to climb the hill that lay between the house and river.

     "Well, that's cool," said Laurie to himself, "to have a picnic
and never ask me!  They can't be going in the boat, for they
haven't got the key.  Perhaps they forgot it.  I'll take it to them,
and see what's going on."

     Though possessed of half a dozen hats, it took him some time
to find one, then there was a hunt for the key, which was at last
discovered in his pocket, so that the girls were quite out of sight
when leaped the fence and ran after them.  Taking the shortest way
to the boathouse, he waited for them to appear, but no one came,
and he went up the hill to take an observation.  A grove of pines
covered one part of it, and from the heart of this green spot came
a clearer sound than the soft sigh of the pines or the drowsy chirp
of the crickets.

     "Here's a landscape!" thought Laurie, peeping through the
bushes, and looking wide-awake and good-natured already.

     It was a rather pretty little picture, for the sisters sat
together in the shady nook, with sun and shadow flickering over
them, the aromatic wind lifting their hair and cooling their hot
cheeks, and all the little wood people going on with their affairs
as if these were no strangers but old friends.  Meg sat upon her
cushion, sewing daintily with her white hands, and looking as fresh
and sweet as a rose in her pink dress among the green.  Beth was
sorting the cones that lay thick under the hemlock near by, for
she made pretty things with them.  Amy was sketching a group of
ferns, and Jo was knitting as she read aloud.  A shadow passed
over the boy's face as he watched them, feeling that he ought to
go away because uninvited, yet lingering because home seemed very
lonely and this quiet party in the woods most attractive to his
restless spirit. He stood so still that a squirrel, busy with it's
harvesting, ran dawn a pine close beside him, saw him suddenly
and skipped back, scolding so shrilly that Beth looked up, espied
the wistful face behind the birches,and beckoned with a reassuring
smile.

     "May I come in, please?  Or shall I be a bother?" he asked,
advancing slowly.

     Meg lifted her eyebrows, but Jo scowled at her defiantly and
said at once, "Of course you may.  We should have asked you before,
only we thought you wouldn't care for such a girl's game as this."

     "I always like your games, but if Meg doesn't want me, I'll
go away."

     "I've no objection, if you do something.  It's against the
rules to be idle here," replied Meg gravely but graciously.

     "Much obliged.  I'll do anything if you'll let me stop a bit,
for it's as dull as the Desert of Sahara down there.  Shall I sew,
read, cone, draw, or do all at once? Bring on your bears.   I'm
ready."  And Laurie sat down with a submissive expression delight-
ful to behold.

     "Finish this story while I set my heel," said Jo, handing him
the book.

     "Yes'm." was the meek answer, as he began, doing his best to
prove his gratitude for the favor of admission into the `Busy Bee
Society'.

     The story was not a long one, and when it was finished, he
ventured to ask a few questions as a reward of merit.

     "Please, ma'am, could I inquire if this highly instructive
and charming institution is a new one?"

     "Would you tell him?" asked Meg of her sisters.

     "He'll laugh," said Amy warningly.

     "Who cares?" said Jo.

     "I guess he'll like it," added Beth.

     "Of course I shall!  I give you my word I won't laugh.  Tell
away, Jo, and don't be afraid."

     "The idea of being afraid of you!  Well, you see we used to
play Pilgrim's Progress, and we have been going on with it in
earnest, all winter and summer."

     "Yes, I know," said Laurie, nodding wisely.

     "Who told you?" demanded Jo.

     "Spirits."

     "No, I did.  I wanted to amuse him one night when you were
all away, and he was rather dismal.  He did like it, so don't
scold, Jo," said Beth meekly.

     "You can't keep a secret.  Never mind, it saves trouble now."

     "Go on, please," said Laurie, as Jo became absorbed in her
work, looking a trifle displeased.

     "Oh, didn't she tell you about this new plan of ours?  Well,
we have tried not to waste our holiday, but each has had a task
and worked at it with a will.  The vacation is nearly over, the
stints are all done, and we are ever so glad that we didn't dawdle."

     "Yes, I should think so," and Laurie thought regretfully of
his own idle days.

     "Mother likes to have us out-of-doors as much as possible, so
we bring our work here and have nice times.  For the fun of it we
bring our things in these bags, wear the old hats, use poles to
climb the hill, and play pilgrims, as we used to do years ago.  We
call this hill the Delectable Mountain, for we can look far away
and see the country where we hope to live some time."

     Jo pointed, and Laurie sat up to examine, for through an
opening in the wood one could look cross the wide, blue river,
the meadows on the other side, far over the outskirts of the
great city, to the green hills that rose to meet the sky.  The
sun was low, and the heavens glowed with the splendor of an
autumn sunset.  Gold and purple clouds lay on the hilltops,
and rising high into the ruddy light were silvery white peaks
that shone like the airy spires of some Celestial City.

     "How beautiful that is!" said Laurie softly, for he was quick
to see and feel beauty of any kind.

     "It's often so, and we like to watch it, for it is never the
same, but always splendid," replied Amy, wishing she could paint it.

     "Jo talks about the country where we hope to live some time--
the real country, she means, with pigs and chickens and haymaking.
It would be nice, but I wish the beautiful country up there was real,
and we could ever go to it," said Beth musingly.

     "There is a lovelier country even than that, where we shall go,
by-and-by, when we are good enough," answered Meg with her sweetest
voice.

     "It seems so long to wait, so hard to do.  I want to fly away
at once, as those swallows fly, and go in at that splendid gate."

     "You'll get there, Beth, sooner or later, no fear of that,"
said Jo.  "I'm the one that will have to fight and work, and climb
and wait, and maybe never get in after all."

     "you'll have me for company, if that's any comfort.  I shall
have to do a deal of traveling before I come in sight of your
Celestial City.  If I arrive late, you'll say a good word for me,
won't you, Beth?"

     Something in the boy's face troubled his little friend, but
she said cheerfully, with her quiet eyes on the changing clouds,
"If people really want to go, and really try all their lives, I
think they will get in, for I don't believe there are any locks
on that door or any guards at the gate.  I always imagine it is
as it is in the picture, where the shining ones stretch out their
hands to welcome poor Christian as he comes up from the river.

     "Wouldn't it be fun if all the castles in the air which we
make could come true, and we could live in them?" said Jo, after
a little pause.

     "I've made such quantities it would be hard to choose which
I'd have," said Laurie, lying flat and throwing cones at the
squirrel who had betrayed him.

     "You'd have to take your favorite one.  What is it?" asked
Meg.

     "If I tell mine, will you tell yours?"

     "Yes, if the girls will too."

     "We will.  Now, Laurie."

     "After I'd seen as much of the world as I want to, I'd like
to settle in Germany and have just as much music as I choose.  I'm
to be a famous musician myself, and all creation is to rush to hear
me.  And I'm never to be bothered about money or business, but just
enjoy myself and live for what I like.  That's my favorite castle.
What's yours, Meg?"

     Margaret seemed to find it a little hard to tell hers, and
waved a brake before her face, as if to disperse imaginary gnats,
while she said slowly, "I should like a lovely house, full of all
sorts of luxurious things--nice food, pretty clothes, handsome
furniture, pleasant people, and heaps of money.  I am to be
mistress of it, and manage it as I like, with plenty of servants,
so I never need work a bit.  How I should enjoy it!  For I wouldn't
be idle, but do good, and make everyone love me dearly."

     "Wouldn't you have a master for your castle in the air?" asked
Laurie slyly.

     "I said `pleasant people', you know," And Meg carefully tied
up her shoe as she spoke, so that no one saw her face.

     "Why don't you say you'd have a splendid, wise, good husband
and some angelic little children?  You know your castle wouldn't
be perfect without," said blunt Jo, who had no tender fancies yet,
and rather scorned romance, except in books.

     "You'd have nothing but horses, inkstands, and novels in
yours," answered Meg petulantly.

     "Wouldn't I though?  I'd have a stable full of Arabian steeds,
rooms piled high with books, and I'd write out of a magic inkstand,
so that my works should be as famous as Laurie's music.  I want to
do something splendid before I go into my castle, something heroic
or wonderful that won't be forgotten after I'm dead.  I don't know
what, but I'm on the watch for it, and mean to astonish you all
some day.  I think I shall write books, and get rich and famous,
that would suit me, so that is my favorite dream."

     "Mine is to stay at home safe with Father and Mother, and
help take care of the family," said Beth contentedly.

     "Don't you wish for anything else?" asked Laurie.

     "Since I had my little piano, I am perfectly satisfied.  I
only wish we may all keep well and be together, nothing else."

     "I have ever so many wishes, but the pet one is to be an
artist, and go to Rome, and do fine pictures, and be the best
artist in the whole world," was Amy's modest desire.

     "We're an ambitious set, aren't we?  Every one of us, but
Beth, wants to be rich and famous, and gorgeous in every respect.
I do wonder if any of us will ever get our wishes," said Laurie,
chewing grass like a meditative calf.

     "I've got the key to my castle in the air, but whether I can
unlock the door remains to be seen," observed Jo mysteriously.

     "I've got the key to mine, but I'm not allowed to try it.
Hang college!" muttered Laurie with an impatient sigh.

     "Here's mine!" and Amy waved her pencil.

     "I haven't got any," said Meg forlornly.

     "Yes, you have," said Laurie at once.

     "Where?"

     "In your face."

     "Nonsense, that's of no use."

     "Wait and see if it doesn't bring you something worth having,"
replied the boy, laughing at the thought of a charming little
secret which he fancied he knew.

     Meg colored behind the brake, but asked no questions and
looked across the river with the same expectant expression which
Mr. Brooke had worn when he told the story of the knight.

     "If we are all alive ten years hence, let's meet, and see how
many of us have got our wishes, or how much nearer we are then than
now," said Jo, always ready with a plan.

     "Bless me!  How old I shall be, twenty-seven!" exclaimed Meg,
who felt grown up already, having just reached seventeen.

     "You and I will be twenty-six, Teddy, Beth twenty-four, and
Amy twenty-two.  What a venerable party!" said Jo.

     "I hope I shall have done something to be proud of by that
time, but I'm such a lazy dog, I'm afraid I shall dawdle, Jo."

     "You need a motive, Mother says, and when you get it, she is
sure you'll work splendidly."

     "Is she?  By Jupiter, I will, if I only get the chance!" cried
Laurie, sitting up with sudden energy.  "I ought to be satisfied to
please Grandfather, and I do try, but it's working against the grain,
you see, and comes hard.  He wants me to be an India merchant, as he
was, and I'd rather be shot.  I hate tea and sild and spices, and
every sort of rubbish his old ships bring, and I don't care how soon
they go to the bottom when I own them.  Going to college ought to
satisfy him, for if I give him four years he ought to let me off
from the business.  But he's set, and I've got to do just as he did,
unless I break away and please myself, as my father did.  If there
was anyone left to stay with the old gentleman, I'd do it tomorrow."

     Laurie spoke excitedly, and looked ready to carry his threat
into execution on the slightest provocation, for he was growing up
very fast and, in spite of his indolent ways, had a young man's
hatred of subjection, a young man's restless longing to try the
world for himself.

     "I advise you to sail away in one of your ships, and never
come home again till you have tried your own way," said Jo, whose
imagination was fired by the thought of such a daring exploit, and
whose sympathy was excited by what she called `Teddy's Wrongs'.

     "That's not right, Jo.  You mustn't talk in that way, and Laurie
mustn't take your bad advice.  You should do just what your grand-
father wishes, my dear boy," said Meg in her most maternal tone.  "do
your best at college, and when he sees that you try to please him,
I'm sure he won't be hard on you or unjust to you.  As you say, there
is no one else to stay with and love him, and you'd never forgive
yourself if you left him without his permission.  Don't be dismal or
fret, but do your duty and you'll get your reward, as good Mr. Brooke
has, by being respected and loved."

     "What do you know about him?" asked Laurie, grateful for the
good advice, but objecting to the lecture, and glad to turn the
conversation from himself after his unusual outbreak.

     "Only what your grandpa told us about him, how he took good
care of his own mother till she died, and wouldn't go abroad as
tutor to some nice person because he wouldn't leave her.  And how
he provides now for an old woman who nursed his mother, and never
tells anyone, but is just as generous and patient and good as he
can be."

     "So he is, dear old fellow!" said Laurie heartily, as Meg
paused, looking flushed and earnest with her story.  "It's like
Grandpa to find out all about him without letting him know, and
to tell all his goodness to others, so that they might like him.
Brooke couldn't understand why your mother was so kind to him,
asking him over with me and treating him in her beautiful friendly
way.  He thought she was just perfect, and talked about it for
days and days, and went on about you all in flaming style.  If ever
I do get my wish, you see what I'll do for Booke."

     "Begin to do something now by not plaguing his life out,"
said Meg sharply.

     "How do you know I do, Miss?"

     "I can always tell by his face when he goes away.  If you
have been good, he looks satisfied and walks briskly.  If you
have plagued him, he's sober and walks slowly, as if he wanted
to go back and do his work better."

     "Well, I like that?  So you keep an account of my good and
bad marks in Brooke's face, do you?  I see him bow and smile as
he passes your window, but I didn't know you'd got up a telegraph."

     "We haven't.  Don't be angry, and oh, don't tell him I said
anything!  It was only to show that I cared how you get on, and
what is said here is said in confidence, you know," cried Meg,
much alarmed at the thought of what might follow from her care-
less speech.

     "I don't tell tales," replied Laurie, with his `high and mighty'
air, as Jo called a certain expression which he occasionally wore.
"Only if Brooke is going to be a thermometer, I must mind and have
fair weather for him to report."

     "Please don't be offended.  I didn't meant to preach or tell
tales or be silly.  I only thought Jo was encouraging you in a
feeling which you'd be sorry for by-and-by.  You are so kind to
us, we feel as if you were our brother and say just what we think.
Forgive me, I meant it kindly."  And Meg offered her hand with a
gesture both affectionate and timid.

     Ashamed of his momentary pique, Laurie squeezed the kind
little hand, and said frankly, "I'm the one to be forgiven. I'm
cross and have been out of sorts all day.  I like to have you
tell me my faults and be sisterly, so don't mind if I am grumpy
sometimes.  I thank you all the same."

     Bent on showing that he was not offended, he made himself as
agreeable as possible, wound cotton for Meg, recited poetry to
please Jo, shook down cones for Beth, and helped Amy with her
ferns, proving himself a fit person to belong to the `Busy Bee
Society'.  In the midst of an animated discussion on the domestic
habits of turtles (one of those amiable creatures having strolled
up from the river), the faint sound of a bell warned them that
Hannah had put the tea `to draw', and they would just have time
to get home to supper.

     "May I come again?" asked Laurie.

     "Yes, if your are good, and love your book, as the boys in
the primer are told to do," said Meg, smiling.

     "i'll try."

     "Then you may come, and I'll teach you to knit as the Scotch-
men do.  There's a demand for socks just now," added Jo, waving
hers like a big blue worsted banner as they parted at the gate.

     That night, when Beth played to Mr. Laurence in the twilight,
Laurie, standing in the shadow of the curtain, listened to the
little David, whose simple music always quieted his moody spirit,
and watched the old man, who sat with his gray head on his hand,
thinking tender thoughts of the dead child he had loved so much.
Remembering the conversation of the afternoon, the boy said to
himself, with the resolve to make the sacrifice cheerfully, "I'll
let my castle go, and stay with the dear old gentleman while he
needs me, for I am all he has."

                             CHAPTER FOURTEEN

     Jo was very busy in the garret, for the October days began
to grow chilly, and the afternoons were short.  For two or three
hours the sun lay warmly in the high window, showing Jo seated
on the old sofa, writing busily, with her papers spread out
upon a trunk before her, while Scrabble, the pet rat, promen-
aded the beams overhead, accompanied by his oldest son, a fine
young fellow, who was evidently very proud of his whiskers.
Quite absorbed in her work, Jo scribbled away till the last
page was filled, when she signed her name with a flourish and
threw down her pen, exclaiming . . .

     "There, I've done my best!  If this won't suit I shall have
to wait till I can do better."

     Lying back on the sofa, she read the manuscript carefully
through, making dashes here and there, and putting in many
exclamation points, which looked like little balloons.  Then she
tied it up with a smart red ribbon, and sat a minute looking at
it with a sober, wistful expression, which plainly showed how
ernest her work had been.  Jo's desk up here was an old tin
kitchen which hung against the wall.  It it she kept her papers,
and a few books, safely shut away from Scrabble, who, being
likewise of a literary turn,was fond of making a circulating
library of such books as were left in his way by eating the
leaves.  From this tin receptacle Jo produced another manuscript,
and putting both in her pocket, crept quietly downstairs, leaving
her friends to nibble on her pens and taste her ink.

     She put on her hat and jacket as noiselessly as possible, and
going to the back entry window, got out upon the roof of a low
porch, swung herself down to the grassy bank, and took a roundabout
way to the road.  Once there, she composed herself, hailed a passing
omnibus, and rolled away to town, looking very merry and mysterious.

     If anyone had been watching her, he would have thought her
movements decidedly peculiar, for on alighting, she went off at a
great pace till she reached a certain number in a certain busy
street.  Having found the place with some difficulty, she went
into the doorway, looked up the dirty stairs, and after standing
stock still a minute, suddenly dived into the street and walked
away as rapidly as she came.  This maneuver she repeated several
times, to the great amusement of a black-eyed young gentleman
lounging in the window of a building opposite.  On returning for
the third time, Jo gave herself a shake, pulled her hat over her
eyes, and walked up the stairs, looking as if she were going to
have all her teeth out.

     There was a dentist's sign, among others, which adorned the
entrance, and after staring a moment at the pair of artificial
jaws which slowly opened and shut to draw attention to a fine
set of teeth, the young gentleman put on his coat, took his hat,
and went down to post himself in the opposite doorway, saying
with a smile and a shiver, "It's like her to come alone, but if
she has a bad time she'll need someone to help her home."

     In ten minutes Jo came running downstairs with a very red
face and the general appearance of a person who had just passed
through a trying ordeal of some sort.  When she saw the young
gentleman she looked anything but pleased, and passed him with a
nod.  But he followed, asking with an air of sympathy, "Did you
have a bad time?"

     "Not very."

     "You got through quickly."

     "Yes, thank goodness!"

     "Why did you go alone?"

     "Didn't want anyone to know."

     "You're the oddest fellow I ever saw.  How many did you
have out?"

     Jo looked at her friend as if she did not understand him, then
began to laugh as if mightily amused at something.

     "There are two which I want to have come out, but I must wait
a week."

     "What are you laughing at?  You are up to some mischief, Jo,"
said Laurie, looking mystified.

     "So are you. What were you doing, sir, up in that billiard
saloon?"

     "Begging your pardon, ma'am, it wasn't a billiard saloon, but
a gymnasium, and I was taking a lesson in fencing."

     "I'm glad of that."

     "why?"

     "You can teach me, and then when we play HAMLET, you can be
Laertes, and we'll make a fine thing of the fencing scene."

     "Laurie burst out with a hearty boy's laugh, which made
several passers-by smile in spite of themselves.

     "I'll teach you whether we play HAMLET or not.  It's grand
fun and will straighten you up capitally.  But I don't believe
that was your only reason for saying `I'm glad' in that decided
way, was it now?"

     "No, I was glad that you were not in the saloon, because I
hope you never go to such places.  Do you?"

     "Not often."

     "I wish you wouldn't."

     "It's no harm, Jo.  I have billiards at home, but it's no fun
unless you have good players, so, as I'm fond of it, I come some-
times and have a game with Ned Moffat or some of the other fellows."

     "Oh, dear, I'm so sorry, for you'll get to liking it better and
better, and will waste time and money, and grow like those dreadful
boys.  I did hope you'd stay respectable and be a satisfaction to
your friends," said Jo, shaking her head.

     "Can't a fellow take a little innocent amusement now and then
without losing his respectability?" asked Laurie, looking nettled.

     "That depends upon how and where he takes it.  I don't like
Ned and his set, and wish you'd keep out of it.  Mother won't let
us have him at our house, though he wants to come.  And if you
grow like him she won't be willing to have us frolic together as
we do now."

     "Won't she?" asked Laurie anxiously.

     "No, she can't bear fashionable young men, and she'd shut us
all up in bandboxes rather than have us associate with them."

     "Well, she needn't get out her bandboxes yet.  I'm not a
fashionable party and don't mean to be, but I do like harmless
larks now and then, don't you?"

     "Yes, nobody minds them, so lark away, but don't get wild,
will you?  Or there will be an end of all our good times."

     "I'll be a double distilled saint."

     "I can't bear saints.  Just be a simple, honest, respectable
boy, and we'll never desert you.  I don't know what I should do
if you acted like Mr. King's son.  He had plenty of money, but
didn't know how to spend it, and got tipsy and gambled, and ran
away, and forged his father's name, I believe, and was altogether
horrid."

     "You think I'm likely to do the same?  Much obliged."

     "No, I don't--oh, dear, no!--but I hear people talking about
money being such a temptation, and I sometimes wish you were poor.
I shouldn't worry then."

     "Do you worry about me, Jo?"

     "A little, when you look moody and discontented, as you some-
times do, for you've got such a strong will, if you once get started
wrong, I'm afraid it would be hard to stop you."

     Laurie walked in silence a few minutes, and Jo watched him,
wishing she had held her tongue, for his eyes looked angry, though
his lips smiled as if at her warnings.

     "Are you going to deliver lectures all the way home?" he
asked presently.

     "Of course not.  Why?"

     "Because if you are, I'll take a bus.  If you're not, I'd like
to walk with you and tell you something very interesting."

     "I won't preach any more, and I'd like to hear the news
immensely."

     "Very well, then, come on.  It's a secret, and if I tell you,
you must tell me yours."

     "I haven't got any," began Jo, but stopped suddenly, remember-
ing that she had.

     "You know you have--you can't hide anything, so up and fess,
or I won't tell," cried Laurie.

     "Is your secret a nice one?"

     "Oh, isn't it!  All about people you know, and such fun!  You
ought to hear it, and I've been aching to tell it this long time.
Come, you begin."

     "You'll not say anything about it at home, will you?"

     "Not a word."

     "And you won't tease me in private?"

     "I never tease."

     "Yes, you do. You get everything you want out of people.  I
don't know how you do it, but you are a born wheedler."

     "Thank you. Fire away."

     "Well, I've left two stories with a newspaperman, and he's to
give his answer next week," whispered Jo, in her confidant's ear.

     "Hurrah for Miss March, the celebrated American authoress!"
cried Laurie, throwing up his hat and catching it again, to the
great delight of two ducks, four cats, five hens, and half a
dozen Irish children, for they were out of the city now.

     "Hush!  It won't come to anything, I dare say, but I couldn't
rest till I had tried, and I said nothing about it because I didn't
want anyone else to be disappointed."

     "It won't fail.  Why, Jo, your stories are works of Shake-
speare compared to half the rubbish that is published every day.
Won't it be fun to see them in print, and shan't we feel proud of
our authoress?"

     Jo's eyes sparkled, for it is always pleasant to be believed
in, and a friend's praise is always sweeter than a dozen newspaper
puffs.

     "Where's your secret?  Play fair, Teddy, or I'll never believe
you again," she said, trying to extinguish the brilliant hopes that
blazed up at a word of encouragement.

     "I may get into a scrape for telling, but I didn't promise
not to, so I will, for I never feel easy in my mind till I've told
you any plummy bit of news I get.  I know where Meg's glove is."

     "Is that all? said Jo, looking disappointed, as Laurie nodded
and twinkled with a face full of mysterious intelligence.

     "It's quite enough for the present, as you'll agree when I
tell you where it is."

     "Tell, then."

     Laurie bent, and whispered three words in Jo's ear, which
produced a comical change.  She stood and stared at him for a
minute, looking both surprised and displeased, then walked on,
saying sharply, "How do you know?"

     "Saw it."

     "Where?'

     "Pocket."

     "All this time?"

     "Yes, isn't that romantic?"

     "No, it's horrid."

     "Don't you like it?"

     "Of course I don't.  It's ridiculous, it won't be allowed. My
patience!  What would Meg say?"

     "You are not to tell anyone.  Mind that."

     "I didn't promise."

     "That was understood, and I trusted you."

     "Well, I won't for the present, anyway, but I'm disgusted, and
wish you hadn't told me."

     "I thought you'd be pleased."

     "At the idea of anybody coming to take Meg away? No, thank you."

     "You'll feel better about it when somebody comes to take you
away."

     "I'd like to see anyone try it," cried Jo fiercely.

     "So should I!"  And Laurie chuckled at the idea.

     "I don't think secrets agree with me, I feel rumpled up in
my mind since you told me that," said Jo rather ungratefully.

     "Race down this hill with me, and you'll be all right,"
suggested Laurie.

     No one was in sight, the smooth road sloped invitingly before
her, and finding the temptation irresistible, Jo darted away, soon
leaving hat and comb behind her and scattering hairpins as she ran.
Laurie reached the goal first and was quite satisfied with the
success of his treatment, for his Atalanta came panting up with
flying hair, bright eyes, ruddy cheeks, and no signs of dissatis-
faction in her face.

     "I wish I was a horse, then I could run for miles in this
splendid air, and not lose my breath.  It was capital, but see
what a guy it's made me.  Go, pick up my things, like a cherub,
as you are," said Jo, dropping down under a maple tree, which
was carpeting the bank with crimson leaves.

     Laurie leisurely departed to recover the lost property, and
Jo bundled up her braids, hoping no one would pass by till she
was tidy again.  But someone did pass, and who should it be but
Meg, looking particularly ladylike in her state and festival
suit, for she had been making calls.

     "What in the world are you doing here?" she asked, regarding
her disheveled sister with well-bred surprise.

     "Getting leaves," meekly answered Jo, sorting the rosy handful
she had just swept up.

     "And hairpins," added Laurie, throwing half a dozen into Jo's
lap.  "They grow on this road, Meg, so do combs and brown straw
hats."

     "You have been running, Jo.  How could you?  When will you stop
such romping ways?" said Meg reprovingly, as she settled her cuffs
and smoothed her hair, with which the wind had taken liberties.

     "Never till I'm stiff and old and have to use a crutch. Don't
try to make me grow up before my time, Meg.  It's hard enough to
have you change all of a sudden.  Let me be a little girl as long
as I can."

     As she spoke, Jo bent over the leaves to hide the trembling
of her lips, for lately she had felt that Margaret was fast getting
to be a woman, and Laurie's secret made her dread the separation
which must surely come some time and now seemed very near.  He saw
the trouble in her face and drew Meg's attention from it by asking
quickly, "Where have you been calling, all so fine?"

     "At the Gardiners', and Sallie has been telling me all about
Belle Moffat's wedding.  It was very splendid, and they have gone
to spend the winter in Paris.  Just think how delightful that
must be!"

     "Do you envy her, Meg?" said Laurie.

     "I'm afraid I do."

     "I'm glad of it!" muttered Jo, tying on her hat with a jerk.

     "Why?" asked Meg, looking surprised.

     "Because if you care much about riches, you will never go and
marry a poor man," said Jo, frowning at Laurie, who was mutely
warning her to mind what she said.

     "I shall never `go and marry' anyone," observed Meg, walking
on with great dignity while the others followed, laughing, whisper-
ing, skipping stones, and `behaving like children', as Meg said to
herself, though she might have been tempted to join them if she
had not had her best dress on.

     For a week or two, Jo behaved so queerly that her sisters
were quite bewildered.  She rushed to the door when the postman
rang, was rude to Mr. Brooke whenever they met, would sit looking
at Meg with a woe-begone face, occasionally jumping up to shake
and then kiss her in a very mysterious manner.  Laurie and she
were always making signs to one another, and talking about
`Spread Eagles' till the girls declared they had both lost their
wits.  On the second Saturday after Jo got out of the window, Meg,
as she sat sewing at her window, was scandalized by the sight of
Laurie chasing Jo all over the garden and finally capturing her
in Amy's bower.  What went on there, Meg could not see, but shrieks
of laughter were heard, followed by the murmur of voices and a
great flapping of newspapers.

     "What shall we do with that girl?  She never will behave like
a young lady," sighed Meg, as she watched the race with a disapprov-
ing face.

     "I hope she won't.  She is so funny and dear as she is," said
Beth, who had never betrayed that she was a little hurt at Jo's
having secrets with anyone but her.

     "It's very trying, but we never can make her commy la fo,"
added Amy, who sat making some new frills for herself, with  her
curls tied up in a very becoming way., two agreeable things that
made her feel unusually elegant and ladylike.

     In a few minutes Jo bounced in, laid herself on the sofa,
and affected to read.

     "Have you anything interesting there?" asked Meg, with cond-
escension.

     "Nothing but a story, won't amount to much, I guess," returned
Jo, carefully keeping the name of the paper out of sight.

     "You'd better read it aloud.  That will amuse us and keep you
out of mischief," said Amy in her most grown-up tone.

     "What's the name?" asked Beth, wondering why Jo kept her face
behind the sheet.

     "The Rival Painters."

     "That sounds well.  Read it," said Meg.

     With a loud "Hem!" and a long breath, Jo began to read very
fast.  The girls listened with interest, for the tale was romantic,
and somewhat pathetic, as most of the characters died in the end.

     "I like that about the splendid picture," was Amy's approving
remark, as Jo paused.

     "I prefer the lovering part.  Viola and Angelo are two of our
favorite names, isn't that queer?" said Meg, wiping her eyes, for
the lovering part was tragical.

     "Who wrote it?" asked Beth, who had caught a glimpse of Jo's
face.

     The reader suddenly sat up, cast away the paper, displaying
a flushed countenance, and with a funny mixture of solemnity and
excitement replied in a loud voice, "Your sister."

     "You?" cried Meg, dropping her work.

     "It's very good," said Amy critically.

     "I knew it!  I knew it! Oh, my Jo, I am so proud!"  And Beth
ran to hug her sister and exult over this splendid success.

     Dear me, how delighted they all were, to be sure!  How Meg
wouldn't believe it till she saw the words.  "Miss Josephine
March," actually printed in the paper.  How graciously Amy
critisized the artistic parts of the story, and offered hints for
a sequel, which unfortunately couldn't be carried out, as the
hero and heroine were dead.  How Beth got excited, and skipped
and sang with joy.  How Hannah came in to exclaim, "Sakes alive,
well I never!" in great astonishment at `that Jo's doin's'.  How
proud Mrs. March was when she knew it.  How Jo laughed, with
tears in her eyes, as she declared she might as well be a peacock
and done with it.  and how th `Spread Eagle' might be said to
flap his wings triumphantly over the House of March, as the
paper passed from hand to hand.

     "Tell us about it."  "When did it come?"  "How much did you
get for it?"  "What will Father say?"  "Won't Laurie laugh?" cried
the family, all in one breath as they clustered about Jo, for
these foolish, affectionate people mad a jubilee of every little
household joy.

     "Stop jabbering, girls, and I'll tell you everything,"
said Jo, wondering if Miss Burney felt any grander over her
EVILINA than she did over her `Rival Painters'.  Having told
how she disposed of her tales, Jo added,  "And when I went to
get my answer, the man said he liked them both, but didn't
pay beginners, only let them print in his paper, and noticed
the stories.  It was good practice, he said, and when the be-
ginners improved, anyone would pay.  So I let him have the two
stories, and today this was sent to me, and Laurie caught me
with it and insisted on seeing it, so I let him.  And he said
it was good, and I shall write more, and he's going to get the
next paid for, and I am so happy, for in time I may be able to
support myself and help the girls."

     Jo's breath gave out here, and wrapping her head in the
paper, she bedewed her little story with a few natural tears,
for to be independent and earn the praise of those she loved
were the dearest wishes of her heart, and this seemed to be the
first step toward that happy end.

                           CHAPTER FIFTEEN

     "November is the most disagreeable month in the whole year,"
said Margaret, standing at the window one dull afternoon, look-
ing out at the frostbitten garden.

     "That's the reason I was born in it," observed Jo pensively,
quite unconscious of the blot on her nose.

     "If something very pleasant should happen now, we should
think it a delightful month," said Beth, who took a hopeful view
of everything, even November.

     "I dare say, but nothing pleasant ever does happen in this
family," said Meg, who was out of sorts.  "We go grubbing along
day after day, without a bit of change, and very little fun. We
might as well be in a treadmill."

     "My patience, how blue we are!" cried Jo.  "I don't much
wonder, poor dear, for you see other girls having splendid times,
while you grind, grind, year in and year out.  Oh, don't I wish
I could manage things for you as I do for my heroines!  You're
pretty enough and good enough already, so I'd have some rich relation
leave you a fortune unexpectedly.  Then you'd dash out as an heiress,
scorn everyone who has slighted you, go abroad, and come home my Lady
Something in a blaze of splendor and elegance."

     "People don't have fortunes left them in that style nowadays,
men have to work and women marry for money.  It's a dreadfully unjust
world," said Meg bitterly.

     "Jo and I are going to make fortunes for you all.  Just wait ten
years, and see if we don't," said Amy, who sat in a corner making mud
pies, as Hannah called her little clay models of birds, fruit, and
faces.

     "Can't wait, and I'm afraid I haven't much faith in ink and dirt,
though I'm grateful for your good intentions.

     Meg sighed, and turned to the frostbitten garden again.  Jo
groaned and leaned both elbows on the table in a despondent attitude,
but Amy spatted away energetically, and Beth, who sat at the other
window, said, smiling,  "Two pleasant things are going to happen
right away.  Marmee is coming down the street, and Laurie is tramping
through the garden as if he had something nice to tell."

     In they both came, Mrs. March with her usual question, "Any letter
from Father, girls?"  and Laurie to say in his persuasive way, "Won't
some of you come for a drive?  I've been working away at mathematics
till my head is in a muddle, and I'm going to freshen my wits by a
brisk turn.  It's a dull day, but the air isn't bad, and I'm going to
take Brooke home, so it will be gay inside, if it isn't out.  Come,
Jo, you and Beth will go, won't you?"

     "Of course we will."

     "Much obliged, but I'm busy."  And Meg whisked out her workbasket,
for she had agreed with her mother that it was best, for her at least,
not to drive too often with the young gentleman.

     "We three will be ready in a minute," cried Amy, running away to
wash her hands.

     "Can I do anything for you, Madam Mother?" asked Laurie, leaning
over Mrs. March's chair with the affectionate look and tone he always
gave her.


     "No, thank you, except call at the office, if you'll be so kind,
dear.  It's our day for a letter, and the postman hasn't been.  Father
is as regular as the sun, but there's some delay on the way, perhaps."

     A sharp ring interrupted her, and a minute after Hannah came in
with a letter.

     "It's one of them horrid telegraph things, mum," she said,
handling it as if she was afraid it would explode and do some damage.

     At the word `telegraph', Mrs. March snatched it, read the two
lines it contained, and dropped back into her chair as white as if
the little paper had sent a bullet to her heart.  Laurie dashed
downstairs for water, while Meg and Hannah supported her, and Jo read
aloud, in a frightened voice . . .

     Mrs. March:
          Your husband is very ill.  Come at once.
                                     S. HALE
                       Blank Hospital, Washington.

     How still the room was as they listened breathlessly, how
strangely the day darkened outside, and how suddenly the whole world
seemed to change, as the girls gathered about their mother, feeling
as if all the happiness and support of their lives was about to be
taken from them.

     Mrs. March was herself again directly, read the message over,
and stretched out her arms to her daughters, saying, in a tone they
never forgot, "I shall go at once, but it may be too late.  Oh,
children, children, help me to bear it!"

     For several minutes there was nothing but the sound of sobbing
in the room, mingled with broken words of comfort, tender assurances
of help, and hopeful whispers that died away in tears.  Poor Hannah
was the first to recover, and with unconscious wisdom she set all the
rest a good example, for with her, work was panacea for most
afflictions.

     "The Lord keep the dear man!  I won't waste no time a-cryin',
but git your things ready right away, mum," she said heartily, as she
wiped her face on her apron, gave her mistress a warm shake of the
hand with her own hard one, and went away to work like three women
in one.

     "She's right, there's no time for tears now.  Be calm, girls,
and let me think."

     They tried to be calm, poor things, as their mother sat up,
looking pale but steady, and put away her grief to think and plan
for them.

     "Where's Laurie?' she asked presently, when she had collected
her thoughts and decided on the first duties to be done.

     "Here, ma'am.  Oh, let me do something!" cried the boy, hurry-
ing from the next room whither he had withdrawn, feeling that their
first sorrow was too sacred for even his friendly eyes to see.

     "Send a telegram saying I will come at once.  The next train
goes early in the morning.  I'll take that."

     "What else?  The horses are ready.  I can go anywhere, do
anything," he said, looking ready to fly to the ends of the earth.

     "Leave a note at Aunt March's.  Jo, give me that pen and paper."

     Tearing off the blank side of one of her newly copied pages,
Jo drew the table before her mother, well knowing that money for the
long, sad journey must be borrowed, and feeling as if she could do
anything to add to a little to the sum for her father.

     "Now go, dear, but don't kill yourself driving at a desperate
pace.  There is no need of that."

     Mrs. March's warning was evidently thrown away, for five minutes
later Laurie tore by the window on his own fleet horse, riding as if
for his life.

     "Jo, run to the rooms, and tell Mrs. King that I can't come.
On the way get these things.  I'll put them down, they'll be needed
and I must go prepared for nursing.  Hospital stores are not always
good.  Beth, go and ask Mr. Laurence for a couple of bottles of old
wine.  I'm not too proud to beg for Father.  He shall have the best
of everything.  Amy, tell Hannah to get down the black trunk, and
Meg, come and help me find my things, for I'm half bewildered."

     Writing, thinking, and directing all at once might well be-
wilder the poor lady, and Meg begged her to sit quietly in her
room for a little while, and let them work.  Everyone scattered
like leaves before a gust of wind, and the quiet, happy household
was broken up as suddenly as if the paper had been an evil spell.

     Mr. Laurence came hurrying back with Beth, bringing every
comfort the kind old gentleman could think of for the invalid, and
friendliest promises of protection for the girls during the mother's
absence, which comforted her very much.  There was nothing he didn't
offer, from his own dressing gown to himself as escort.  But the
last was impossible.  Mrs. March would not hear of the old gentle-
man's undertaking the long journey, yet an expression of relief was
visible when he spoke of it, for anxiety ill fits one for traveling.
He saw the look, knit his heavy eyebrows, rubbed his hands, and
marched abruptly away, saying he'd be back directly.  No one had
time to think of him again till, as Meg ran through the entry, with
a pair of rubbers in one hand and a cup of tea in the other, she
came suddenly upon Mr. Brooke.

     "I'm very sorry to hear of this, Miss March," he said, in the
kind, quiet tone which sounded very pleasantly to her perturbed
spirit.  "I came to offer myself as escort to your mother.  Mr.
Laurence has commissions for me in Washington, and it will give me
real satisfaction to be of service to her there."

     Down dropped the rubbers, and the tea was very near following,
as Meg put out her hand, with a face so full of gratitude that Mr.
Brooke would have felt repaid for a much greater sacrifice than
the trifling one of time and comfort which he was about to take.

     "How kind you all are!  Mother will accept, I'm sure, and it
will be such a relief to know that she has someone to take care of
her.  Thank you very, very much!"

     Meg spoke earnestly, and forgot herself entirely till some-
thing in the brown eyes looking down at her made her remember the
cooling tea, and lead the way into the parlor, saying she would
call her mother.

     Everything was arranged by the time Laurie returned with a
note from Aunt March, enclosing the desired sum, and a few lines
repeating what she had often said before, that she had always told
them it was absurd for March to go into the army, always predicted
that no good would come of it, and she hoped they would take her
advice the next time.  Mrs. March put the note in the fire, the
money in her purse, and went on with her preparations, with her
lips folded tightly in a way which Jo would have understood if she
had been there.

     The short afternoon wore away.  All other errands were done,
and Meg and her mother busy at some necessary needlework, while
Beth and Amy goth tea, and Hannah finished her ironing with what
she called a `slap and a bang', but still Jo did not come.  They
began to get anxious, and Laurie went off to find her, for no one
knew what freak Jo might take into her head.  He missed her, how-
ever, and she came walking in with a very queer expression of
countenance, for there was a mixture of fun and fear, satisfaction
and regret in it, which puzzled the family as much as did the roll
of bills she laid before her mother, saying with a little choke in
her voice, "That's my contribution toward making Father comfortable
and bringing him home!"

     "My dear, where did you get it?  Twenty-five dollars!  Jo, I
hope you haven't done anything rash?"

     "No, it's mine honestly.  I didn't beg, borrow, or steal it. I
earned it, and I don't think you'll blame me, for I only sold what
was my own."

     As she spoke, Jo took off her bonnet, and a general outcry arose,
for all her abundant hair was cut short.

     "Your hair!  Your beautiful hair!"  "Oh, Jo, how could you? Your
one beauty."  "My dear girl, there was no need of this."  "She doesn't
look like my Jo any more, but I love her dearly for it!"

     As everyone exclaimed, and Beth hugged the cropped head tenderly,
Jo assumed an indifferent air, which did not deceive anyone a particle,
and said, rumpling up the brown bush and trying to look as if she liked
it, "It doesn't affect the fate of the nation, so don't wail, Beth.  It
will be good for my vanity, I getting too proud of my wig.  It will do
my brains good to have that mop taken off.  My head feels deliciously
light and cool, and the barber said I could soon have a curly crop,
which will be boyish, becoming, and easy to keep in order.  I'm satis-
fied, so please take the money and let's have supper."

     "Tell me all about it, Jo.  I am not quite satisfied, but I can't
blame you, for I know how willingly you sacrificed your vanity, as
you call it, to your love.  But, my dear, it was not necessary, and
I'm afraid you will regret it one of these days," said Mrs. March.

     "No, I won't!" returned Jo stoutly, feeling much relieved that
her prank was not entirely condemned.

     "What made you do it?" asked Amy, who would as soon have thought
of cutting off her head as her pretty hair.

     "Well, I was wild to to something for Father," replied Jo, as
they gathered about the table, for healthy young people can eat even
in the midst of trouble.  "I hate to borrow as much as Mother does,
and I knew Aunt March would croak, she always does, if you ask for
a ninepence.  Meg gave all her quarterly salary toward the rent, and
I only got some clothes with mine, so I felt wicked, and was bound
to have some money, if I sold the nose off my face to get it."

     "You needn't feel wicked, my child! You had no winter things and
got the simplest with your own hard earnings," said Mrs. March with a
look that warmed Jo's heart.

     "I hadn't the least idea of selling my hair at first, but as I
went along I kept thinking what I could do, and feeling as if I'd
like to dive into some of the rich stores and help myself.  In a
barber's window I saw tails of hair with the prices marked, and one
black tail, not so thick as mine, was forty dollars.  It came to me
all of a sudden that I had one thing to make money out of, and with-
out stopping to think, I walked in, asked if they bought hair, and
what they would give for mine."

     "I don't see how you dared to do it," said Beth in a tone of awe.

     "Oh, he was a little man who looked as if he merely lived to oil
his hair.  He rather stared at first, as if he wasn't used to having
girls bounce into his shop and ask him to buy their hair.  He said he
didn't care about mine, it wasn't the fashionable color, and he never
paid much for it in the first place.  The work he put it into it made
it dear, and so on.  It was getting late, and I was afraid if it
wasn't done right away that I shouldn't have it done at all, and you
know when I start to do a thing, I hate to give it up.  So I begged
him to take it, and told him why I was in such a hurry.  It was
silly, I dare say, but it changed his mind, for I got rather excited,
and told the story in my topsy-turvy way, and his wife heard, and
said so kindly, `Take it, Thomas, and oblige the young lady.  I'd do
as much for our Jimmy any day if I had a spire of hair worth selling."

     "Who was Jimmy?" asked Amy, who liked to have things explained
as they went along.

     "Her son, she said, who was in the army.  How friendly such
things make strangers feel, don't they?  She talked away all the
time the man clipped, and diverted my mind nicely."

     "Didn't you feel dreadfully when the first cut came?" asked
Meg, with a shiver.

     "I took a last look at my hair while the man got his things,
and that was the end of it.  I never snivel over trifles like that.
I will confess, though, I felt queer when I saw the dear old hair
laid out on the table, and felt only the short rough ends of my head.
It almost seemed as if I'd an arm or leg off.  The woman saw me look
at it, and picked out a long lock for me to keep.  I'll give it to
you, Marmee, just to remember past glories by, for a crop is so
comfortable I don't think I shall ever have a mane again."

     Mrs. March folded the wavy chestnut lock, and laid it away with
a short gray one in her desk.  She only said, "Thank you, deary,"
but something in her face made the girls change the subject, and
talk as cheerfully as they could about Mr. Brooke's kindness, the
prospect of a fine day tomorrow, and the happy times they would have
when Father came home to be nursed.

     No one wanted to go to bed when at ten o'clock Mrs. March put
by the last finished job, and said, "Come girls."  Beth went to the
piano and played the father's favorite hymn.  All began bravely, but
broke down one by one till Beth was left alone, singing with all her
heart, for to her music was always a sweet consoler.

     "Go to bed and don't talk, for we must be up early and shall
need all the sleep we can get.  Good night, my darlings," said Mrs.
March, as the hymn ended, for no one cared to try another.

     They kissed her quietly, and went to bed as silently as if the
dear invalid lay in the next room. Beth and Amy soon fell asleep in
spite of the great trouble, but Meg lay awake, thinking the most
serious thoughts she had ever known in her short life.  Jo lay motion-
less, and her sister fancied that she was asleep, till a stifled sob
made her exclaim, as she touched a wet cheek . . .

     "Jo, dear, what is it?  Are you crying about father?"

     "No, not now."

     "What then?"

     "My . . . My hair!" burst out poor Jo, trying vainly to smother
her emotion in the pillow.

     It did not seem at all comical to Meg, who kissed and caressed
the afflicted heroine in the tenderest manner.

     "I'm not sorry," protested Jo, with a choke.  "I'd do it again
tomorrow, if I could.  It's only the vain part of me that goes and
cries in this silly way.  Don't tell anyone, it's all over now.  I
thought you were asleep, so I just made a little private moan for my
one beauty.  How came you to be awake?"

     "I can't sleep, I'm so anxious," said Meg.

     "Think about something pleasant, and you'll soon drop off."

     "I tried it, but felt wider awake than ever."

     "What did you think of?"

     "Handsome faces--eyes particularly," answered Meg, smiling to
herself in the dark.

     "What color do you like best?"

     "Brown, that is, sometimes. Blue are lovely."

     Jo, laughed, and Meg sharply ordered her not to talk, then
amiably promised to make her hair curl, and fell asleep to dream of
living in her castle in the air.

     The clocks were striking midnight and the rooms were very still
as a figure glided quietly from bed to bed, smoothing a coverlet here,
settling a pillow there, and pausing to look long and tenderly at each
unconscious face, to kiss each with lips that mutely blessed, and to
pray the fervent prayers which only mothers utter.  As she lifted the
curtain to look out into the dreary night, the moon broke suddenly
from behind the clouds and shone upon her like a bright, benignant
face, which seemed to whisper in the silence," Be comforted, dear
soul!  There is always light behind the clouds."

                           CHAPTER SIXTEEN

     In the cold gray dawn the sisters lit their lamp and read
their chapter with an earnestness never felt before.  For now
the shadow of a real trouble had come, the little books were full
of help and comfort, and as they dressed, they agreed to say good-
bye cheerfully and hopefully, and send their mother on her anxious
journey unsaddened by tears or complaints from them.  Everything
seemed very strange when they went down, so dim and still outside,
so full of light and bustle within.  Breakfast at that early hour
seemed odd, and even Hannah's familiar face looked unnatural as she
flew about her kitchen with her nightcap on.  The big trunk stood
ready in the hall, Mother's cloak and bonnet lay on the sofa, and
Mother herself sat trying to eat, but looking so pale and worn
with sleeplessness and anxiety that the girls found it very hard
to keep their resolution.  Meg's eyes kept filling in spite of
herself, Jo was obliged to hide her face in the kitchen roller
more than once, ant the little girls wore a grave, troubled express-
ion, as if sorrow was a new experience to them.

     Nobody talked much, but as the time drew very near and they
sat waiting for the carriage, Mrs. March said to the girls, who
were all busied about her, one folding her shawl, another smooth-
ing out the strings of her bonnet, a third putting on her overshoes,
and a forth fastening up her travelling bag . . .

     "Children, I leave you to Hannah's care and Mr. Laurence's
protection.  Hannah is faithfulness itself, and our good neighbor
will guard you as if you were his own.  I have no fears for you,
yet I am anxious that you should take this trouble rightly.  Don't
grieve and fret when I am gone, or think that you can be idle and
comfort yourselves by being idle and trying to forget.  Go on
with your work as usual, for work is a blessed solace.  Hope and
keep busy, and whatever happens, remember that you never can be
fatherless."

     "Yes, Mother."

     "Meg, dear, be prudent, watch over your sisters, consult
Hannah, and in any perplexity, go to Mr. Laurence.  Be patient, Jo,
don't get despondent or do rash things, write to me often, and be
my brave girl, ready to help and cheer all.  Beth, comfort yourself
with your music, and be faithful to the little home duties, and You
Amy, help all you can, be obedient, and keep happy safe at home."

     "We will, Mother!  We will!"

     The rattle of an approaching carriage made them all start and
listen.  That was the hard minute, but the girls stood it well.  No
one cried, no one ran away or uttered a lamentation, though their
hearts were very heavy as they sent loving messages to Father, rem-
embering, as they spoke that it might be too late to deliver them.
They kissed their mother quietly, clung about her tenderly, and
tried to wave their hands cheerfully when she drove away.

     Laurie and his grandfather came over to see her off, and Mr.
Brooke looked so strong and sensible and kind that the girls
christened him `Mr. Greatheart' on the spot.

     "Goodby, my darlings!  God bless and keep us all!" whispered
Mrs. March, as she kissed one dear little face after the other,
and hurried into the carriage.

     As she rolled away, the sun came out, and looking back, she
saw it shining on the group at the gate like a good omen.  They
saw it also, and smiled and waved their hands, and the last thing
she beheld as she turned the corner was the four bright faces, and
behind them like a bodyguard, old Mr. Laurence, faithful Hannah,
and devoted Laurie.

     "How kind everyone is to us!" she said, turning to find fresh
proof of it in the respectful sympathy of the young man's face.

     "I don't see how they can help it," returned Mr. Brooke, laugh-
ing so infectiously that Mrs. March could not help smiling.  And so
the journey began with the good omens of sunshine, smiles, and
cheerful words.

     "I feel as if there had been an earthquake," said Jo, as their
neighbors went home to breakfast, leaving them to rest and refresh
themselves.

     "It seems as if half the house was gone," added Meg forlornly.

     Beth opened her lips to say something, but could only point to
the pile of nicely mended hose which lay on Mother's table, showing
that even in her last hurried moments she had thought and worked
for them.  It was a little thing, but it went straight to their
hearts, and in spite of their brave resolutions, they all broke
down and cried bitterly.

     Hannah wisely allowed them to relieve their feelings, and
when the shower showed signs of clearing up, she came to the
rescue, armed with a coffeepot.

     "Now, ny dear young ladies, remember what your ma said, and
don't fret.  Come and have a cup of coffee all round, and then
let's fall to work and be a credit to the family."

     Coffee was a treat, and Hannah showed great tact in making it
that morning.  No one could resist her persuasive nods, or the
fragrant invitation issuing from the nose of the coffee pot.  They
drew up to the table, exchanged their handkerchiefs for napkins,
and in ten minutes were all right again.

     "`Hope and keep busy', that's the motto for us, so let's see
who will remember it best.  I shall go to Aunt March, as usual.
Oh, won't she lecture though!" said Jo, as she sipped with return-
ing spirit.

     "I shall go to my Kings, though I'd much rather stay at home
and attend to things here," said Meg, wishing she hadn't made her
eyes so red.

     "No need of that.  Beth and I can keep house perfectly well,"
put in Amy, with an important air.

     "Hannah will tell us what to do, and we'll have everything
nice when you come home," added Beth, getting out her mop and dish
tub without delay.

     "I think anxiety is very interesting," observed Amy, eating
sugar pensively.

     The girls couldn't help laughing, and felt better for it,
though Meg shook her head at the young lady who could find consol-
ation in  a sugar bowl.

     The sight of the turnovers made Jo sober again, and when the
two went out to their daily tasks, they looked sorrowfully back
at the window where they were accustomed to see their mother's
face.  It was gone, but Beth had remembered the little household
ceremony, and there she was, nodding away at them like a rosy-
faced mandarin.

     "That's so like my Beth!" said Jo, waving her hat, with a
grateful face.  "Goodbye, Meggy, I hope the Kings won't strain
today.  Don't fret about Father, dear," she added, as they parted.

     "And I hope Aunt March won't croak.  Your hair is becoming,
and it looks very boyish and nice," returned Meg, trying not to
smile at the curly head, which looked comically small on her tall
sister's shoulders.

     "That's my only comfort." And, touching her hat a` la Laurie,
away went Jo, feeling like a shorn sheep on a wintry day.

     News from their father comforted the girls very much, for
though dangerously ill, the presence of the best and tenderest of
nurses had already done him good.  Mr. Brooke sent a bulletin every
day, and as the head of the family, Meg insisted on reading the
dispatches, which grew more cheerful as the week passed.  At first,
everyone was eager to write, and plump envelopes were carefully
poked into the letter box by one or other of the sisters, who felt
rather important with their Washington correspondence.  As one of
these packets contained characteristic notes from the party, we will
rob an imaginary mail, and read them.

     My dearest Mother:

     It is impossible to tell you how happy your last letter made
us, for the news was so good we couldn't help laughing and crying
over it.  How very kind Mr. Brooke is, and how fortunate that Mr.
Laurence's business detains him near you so long, since he is so
useful to you and Father.  The girls are all as good as gold.  Jo
helps me with the sewing, and insists on doing all sorts of hard
jobs.  I should be afraid she might overdo, if I didn't know her
`moral fit' wouldn't last long.  Beth is as regular about her tasks
as a clock, and never forgets what you told her.  She grieves about
Father, and looks sober except when she is at her little piano. Amy
minds me nicely, and I take great care of her.  She does her own
hair, and I am teaching her to make buttonholes and mend her stock-
ings.  She tries very hard, and I know you will be pleased with her
improvement when you come.  Mr. Laurence watches over us like a
motherly old hen, as Jo says, and Laurie is very kind and neighborly.
He and Jo keep us merry, for we get pretty blue sometimes, and feel
like orphans, with you so far away.  Hannah is a perfect saint.  She
does not scold at all, and always calls me Miss Margaret, which is
quite proper, you know, and treats me with respect.  We are all
well and busy, but we long, day and night, to have you back.  Give
my dearest love to Father, and believe me, ever your own . . .

                                                            MEG

     This note, prettily written on scented paper, was a great
contrast to the next, which was scribbled on a big sheet of thin
foreign paper, ornamented with blots and all manner of flourishes
and curly-tailed letters.

     My precious Marmee:

     Three cheers for dear Father!  Brooke was a trump to telegraph
right off, and let us know the minute he was better.  I rushed up
garret when the letter came, and tried to thank god for being so
good to us, but I could only cry, and say, "I'm glad!  I'm glad!"
Didn't that do as well as a regular prayer?  For I felt a great
many in my heart.  We have such funny times, and now I can enjoy
them, for everyone is so desperately good, it's like living in a
nest of turtledoves.  You'd laugh to see Meg head the table and
try to be motherish.  She gets prettier every day, and I'm in love
with her sometimes.  The children are regular archangels, and I--
well, I'm Jo, and never shall be anything else.  Oh, I must tell
you that I came near having a quarrel with Laurie.  I freed my mind
about a silly little thing, and he was offended.  I was right, but
didn't speak as I ought, and he marched home, saying he wouldn't
come again till I begged pardon.  I declared I wouldn't and got mad.
It lasted all day.  I felt bad and wanted you very much. Laurie and
I are both so proud, it's hard to beg pardon.  But I thought he'd
come to it, for I was in the right.  He didn't come, and just at
night I remembered what you said when Amy fell into the river.  I
read my little book, felt better, resolved not to let the sun set
on my anger, and ran over to tell Laurie I was sorry.  I met him
at the gate, coming for the same thing.  We both laughed, begged
each other's pardon, and felt all good and comfortable again.

     I made a `pome' yesterday, when I was helping Hannah wash,
and as Father likes my silly little things, I put it in to amuse
him.  Give him my lovingest hug that ever was, and kiss yourself
a dozen times for your . . .

                                                  TOPSY-TURVY JO

                     A SONG FROM THE SUDS

                  Queen of my tub, I merrily sing,
                  While the white foam rises high,
                  And sturdily wash and rinse and wring,
                  And fasten the clothes to dry.
                  Then out in the free fresh air they swing,
                  Under the sunny sky.

                  I wish we could wash from out hearts and souls
                  The stains of the week away,
                  And let water and air by their magic make
                  Ourselves as pure as they.
                  Then on the earth there would be indeed,
                  A glorious washing day!

                  Along the path of a useful life,
                  Will heartsease ever bloom.
                  The busy mind has no time to think
                  Of sorrow or care or gloom.
                  And anxious thoughts may be swept away,
                  As we bravely wield a broom.

                  I am glad a task to me is given,
                  To labor at day by day,
                  For it brings me health and strength and hope,
                  And I cheerfully learn to say,
                  "Head, you may think, Heart, you may feel,
                  But, Hand, you shall work alway!"

     Dear Mother,

     There is only room for me to send my love, and some pressed
pansies from the root I have been keeping safe in the house for
Father to see.  I read every morning, try to be good all day, and
sing myself to sleep with Father's tune.  I can't sing `LAND OF
THE LEAL' now, it makes me cry.  Everyone is very kind, and we are
as happy as we can be without you.  Amy wants the rest of the page,
so I must stop.  I didn't forget to cover the holders, and I wind
the clock and air the rooms every day.

     Kiss dear Father on the cheek he calls mine.  Oh, do come soon
to your loving . ..

                                                       LITTLE BETH

     Ma Chere Mamma,

     We are all well I do my lessons always and never corroberate
the girls--Meg says I mean contradick so I put in both words and
you can take the properest.  Meg is a great comfort to me and lets
me have jelly every night at tea its so good for me Jo says because
it keeps me sweet tempered. Laurie is not as respeckful as he ought
to be now I am almost in my teens, he calls me Chick and hurts my
feelings by talking French to me very fast when I say Merci or Bon
jour as Hattie King does.  The sleeves of my blue dress were all
worn out, and Meg put in new ones, but the full front came wrong
and they are more blue than the dress.  I felt bad but did not fret
I bear my troubles well but I do wish Hannah would put more starch
in my aprons and have buckwheats every day.  Can't she?  Didn't I
make that interrigation point nice?  Meg says my punchtuation and
spelling are disgraceful and I am mortyfied but dear me I have so
many things to do, I can't stop.  Adieu, I send heaps of love to
Papa.  Your affectionate daughter . ..

                                               AMY CURTIS MARCH

     Dear Mis March,

     I jes drop a line to say we git on fust rate.  The girls is
clever and fly round right smart.  Miss Meg is going to make a
proper good housekeeper.  She hes the liking for it, and gits the
hang of things surprisin quick.  Jo doos beat all for goin ahead,
but she don't stop to cal'k'late fust, and you never know where
she's like to bring up.  She done out a tub of clothes on Monday,
but she starched 'em afore they was wrenched, and blued a pink
calico dress till I thought I should a died a laughin.  Beth is the
best of little creeters, and a sight of help to me, bein so fore-
handed and dependable.  She tries to learn everything, and really
goes to market beyond her years, likewise keeps accounts, with my
help, quite wonderful.  We have got on very economical so fur.  I
don't let the girls hev coffee only once a week, accordin to your
wish, and keep em on plain wholesome vittles.  Amy does well with-
out frettin, wearin her best clothes and eatin sweet stuff.  Mr.
Laurie is as full of didoes as usual, and turns the house upside
down frequent, but he heartens the girls, so I let em hev full
swing.  The old gentleman send heaps of things, and is rather
wearin, but means wal, and it aint my place to say nothin.  My
bread is riz, so no more at this time.  I send my duty to Mr.
March, and hope he's seen the last of his Pewmonia.

    Yours respectful,

                                              HANNAH MULLET

     Head Nurse of Ward No. 2,

     All serene on the Rappahannock, troops in fine condition,
commisary department well conducted, the Home Guard under Colonel
Teddy always on duty, Commander in Chief General Laurence reviews
the army daily, Quartermaster Mullet keeps order in camp, and Major
Lion does picket duty at night.  A salute of twenty-four guns was
fired on reciept of good news from Washington, and a dress parade
took place at headquarters.  Commander in chief sends best wishes,
in which he is heartily joined by . . .

                                                COLONEL TEDDY

     Dear Madam:

     The little girls are all well.  Beth and my boy report daily.
Hannah is a model servant, and guards pretty Meg like a dragon.
Glad the fine weather holds.  Pray make Brooke useful, and draw
on me for funds if expenses exceed your estimate.  Don't let your
husband want anything.  Thank God he is mending.

                                  Your sincere friend and servant,
                                                   JAMES LAURENCE

                          CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

     For a week the amount of virtue in the old house would have
supplied the neighborhood.  It was really amazing, for everyone
seemed in a heavenly frame of mind, and self-denial was all the
fashion.  Relieved of their first anxiety about their father,
girls insensibly relaxed their praiseworthy efforts a little,
and began to fall back into old ways.  They did not forget
their motto, but hoping and keeping busy seemed to grow easier,
and after such tremendous exertions, they felt that Endeavor
deserved a holiday, and gave it a good many.

     Jo caught a bad cold through neglect to cover the shorn
head enough, and was ordered to stay at home till she was better,
for Aunt March didn't like to hear people read with colds in
their heads.  Jo liked this, and after an energetic rummage from
garret to cellar, subsided on the sofa to nurse her cold with
arsenicum and books.  Amy found that housework and art did not
go well together, and returned to her mud pies.  Meg went daily
to her pupils, and sewed, or thought she did, at home, but much
time was spent in writing long letters to her mother, or reading
the Washington dispatches over and over.  Beth kept on, with only
slight relapses into idleness or grieving.

     All the little duties were faithfully done each day, and
many of her sisters' also, for they were forgetful, and the house
seemed like a clock whose pendulum was gone a-visiting.  When her
heart got heavy with longings for Mother or fears for Father, she
went away into a certain closet, hid her face in the folds of a
dear old gown, and made her little moan and prayed her little
prayer quietly by herself.  Nobody knew what cheered her up after
a sober fit, but everyone felt how sweet and helpful Beth was, and
fell into a way of going to her for comfort or advice in their
small affairs.

     All were unconscious that this experience was a test of
character, and when the first excitement was over, felt that they
had done well and deserved praise.  So they did, but their mis-
take was in ceasing to do well, and they learned this lesson
through much anxiety and regret.

     "Meg, I wish you'd go and see the Hummels.  You know Mother
told us not to forget them." said Beth, ten days after Mrs. March's
departure.

     "I'm too tired to go this afternoon," re;lied Meg, rocking
comfortably as she sewed.

     "Can't you, Jo?' asked Beth.

     "Too stormy for me with my cold."

     "I thought it was almost well."

     "It's well enough for me to go out with Laurie, but not well
enough to go to the Hummels'," said Jo, laughing, but looking a
little ashamed of her inconsistency.

     "Why don't you go yourself?" asked Meg.

     "I have been every day, but the baby is sick, and I don't
know what to do for it.  Mrs. Hummel goes away to work, and Lott-
chen takes care of it.  But it gets sicker and sicker, and I think
you or Hannah ought to go."

     Beth spoke earnestly, and Meg promised she would go tomorrow.

     "Ask Hannah for some nice little mess, and take it round, Beth,
the air will do you good,"  said Jo, adding apologetically, "I'd go
but I want to finish my writing."

     "My head aches and I'm tired, so I thought maybe some of you
would go," said Beth.

     "Amy will be in presently, and she will run down for us,
suggested Meg.

     So Beth lay down on the sofa, the others returned to their work,
and the Hummels were forgotten.  An hour passed.  Amy did not come,
Meg went to her room to try on  a new dress, Jo was absorbed in her
story, and Hannah was sound asleep before the kitchen fire,when
Beth quietly put on her hood, filled her basket with odds and ends
for the poor children, and went out into the chilly air with a heavy
head and a grieved look in her patient eyes.  It was late when she
came back, and no one saw her creep upstairs and shut herself into
her mother's room.  Half an hour after, Jo went to `Mother's closet'
for something, and there found little Beth sitting on the medicine
chest, looking very grave, with red eyes and a camphor bottle in
her hand.

     "Christopher Columbus!  What's the matter?" cried Jo, as Beth
put out her hand as if to warn her off, and asked quickly, "You've
had the scarlet fever, havent't you?"

     "Years ago, when Meg did.  Why?'

     "Then I'll tell you.  Oh, Jo, the baby's dead!"

     "What baby?"

     "Mrs. Hummel's.  It died in my lap before she got home," cried
Beth with a sob.

     "My poor dear, how dreadful for you!  I ought to have gone,"
said Jo, taking her sister in her arms as she sat down in her
mother's bit chair, with a remorseful face.

     "It wasn't dreadful, Jo, only so sad!  I saw in a minute it
was sicker, but Lottchen said her mother had gone for a doctor, so
I took Baby and let Lotty rest.  It seemed asleep, but all of a
sudden if gave a little cry and trembled, and then lay very still.
I tried to warm its feet, and Lotty gave it some milk, but it didn't
stir, and I knew it was dead."

     "Don't cry, dear!  What did you do?"

     "I just sat and held it softly till Mrs. Hummel came with the
doctor.  He said it was dead, and looked at Heinrich and Minna, who
have sore throats.  `Scarlet fever, ma'am.  Ought to have called me
before,' he said crossly.  Mrs. Hummel told him she was poor, and
had tried to cure baby herself, but now it was too late, and she
could only ask him to help the others and trust to charity for his
pay.  He smiled then, and was kinder, but it was very sad, and I
cried with them till he turned round all of a sudden, and told me
to go home and take belladonna right away, or I'd have the fever."

     "No, you won't!" cried Jo, hugging her close, with a frightened
look.  "Oh, Beth, if you should be sick I never could forgive myself!
What shall we do?"

     "Don't be frightened, I guess I shan't have it badly.  I looked
in Mother's book, and saw that it begins with headache, sore throat,
and queer feelings like mine, so I did take some belladonna, and I
feel better," said Beth, laying her cold hands on her hot forehead
and trying to look well.

     "If Mother was only at home!" exclaimed Jo, seizing the book,
and feeling that Washington was an immense way off.  She read a page,
looked at Beth, felt her head, peeped into her throat, and then
said gravely, "You've been over the baby every day for more than a
week, and among the others who are going to have it, so I'm afraid
you are going to have it, Beth.  I'll call Hannah, she knows all
about sickness."

     "Don't let Amy come.  She never had it, and I should hate to
give it to her.  Can't you and Meg have it over again?" asked Beth,
anxiously.

     "I guess not.  Don't care if I do.  Serve me right, selfish pig,
to let you go, and stay writing rubbish myself!" muttered Jo, as she
went to consult Hannah.

     The good soul was wide awake in a minute, and took the lead at
once, assuring that there was no need to worry; every one had scarlet
fever, and if rightly treated, nobody died, all of which Jo believed,
and felt much relieved as they went up to call Meg.

     "Now I'll tell you what we'll do," said Hannah, when she had
examined and questioned Beth, "we will have Dr. Bangs, just to take
a look at you, dear, and see that we start right.  Then we'll send
Amy off to Aunt March's for a spell, to keep her out of harm's way,
and one of you girls can stay at home and amuse Beth for a day or two."

     "I shall stay, of course, I'm oldest," began Meg, looking anxious
and self-reproachful.

     "I shall, because it's my fault she is sick.  I told Mother I'd
do the errands, and I haven't," said Jo decidedly.

     "Which will you have, Beth?  There ain't no need of but one,"
said Hannah.

     "Jo, please." And Beth leaned her head against her sister with
a contented look, which effectually settled that point.

     "I'll go and tell Amy," said Meg, feeling a little hurt, yet
rather relieved on the whole, for she did not like nursing, and Jo
did.

     Amy rebelled outright, and passionately declared that she had
rather have the fever than go to Aunt March.  Meg reasoned, pleaded,
and commanded, all in vain.  Amy protested that she would not go,
and Meg left her in despair to ask Hannah what should be done.  Before
she came back, Laurie walked into the parlor to find Amy sobbing, with
her head in the sofa cushions.  She told her story, expecting to be
consoled, but Laurie only put his hands in his pockets and walked
about the room, whistling softly, as he knit his brows in deep
thought.  Presently he sat down beside her, and said, in his most
wheedlesome tone, "Now be a sensible little woman, and do as they say.
No, don't cry, but hear what a jolly plan I've got.  You go to Aunt
March's, and I'll come and take you out every day, driving or walking,
and we'll have capital times. Won't that be better than moping here?"

     "I don't wish to be sent off as if I was in the way," began Amy,
in an injured voice.

     "Bless your heart, child, it's to keep you well.  You don't
want to be sick, do you?"

     "No, I'm sure I don't, but I dare say I shall be, for I've been
with Beth all the time."

     "That's the very reason you ought to go away at once, so that
you may escape it.  Change of air and care will keep you well, I
dare say, or if it does not entirely, you will have the fever more
lightly.  I advise you to be off as soon as you can, for scarlet fever
is no joke, miss."

     "But it's dull at Aunt March's, and she is so cross," said Amy,
looking rather frightened.

     "It won't be dull with me popping; in every day to tell you how
Beth is, and take you out gallivanting.  The old lady likes me, and
I'll be as sweet as possible to her, so she won't peck at us, what-
ever we do."

     "Will you take me out in the trotting wagon with Puck?"

     "On my honor as a gentleman."

     "And come every single day?"

     "See if I don't/"

     "And bring me back the minute Beth is well?"

     "The identical minute."

     "And go to the theater, truly?"

     "A dozen theaters, if we may."

     "Well--I guess I will," said Amy slowly.

     "Good girl!  Call Meg, and tell her you'll give in," said
Laurie, with an approving pat, which annoyed Amy more than the
`giving in'.

     Meg and Jo came running down to behold the miracle which had
been wrought, and Amy, feeling very precious and self-sacrificing,
promised to go, if the doctor said Beth was going to be ill.

     "How is the little dear?" asked Laurie, for Beth was his
especial pet, and he felt more anxious about her than he liked to
show.

     "She is lying down on Mother's bed, and feels better.  The
baby's death troubled her, but I dare say she has only got cold.
Hannah says she thinks so, but she looks worried, and that makes me
fidgety," answered Meg.

     "What a trying world it is!" said Jo, rumpling up her hair in
a fretful way.  "No sooner do we get out of one trouble than down
comes another.  There doesn't seem to be anything to hold on to
when Mother's gone, so I'm all at sea."

      "Well, don't make a porcupine of yourself, it isn't becoming.
Settle your wig, Jo, and tell me if I shall telegraph to your mother,
or do anything?" asked Laurie, who never had been reconciled to the
loss of his friend's one beauty.

     "That is what troubles me," said Meg.  "I think we ought to tell
her if Beth is really ill, but Hannah says we mustn't, for Mother
can't leave Father, and it will only make them anxious.  Beth won't
be sick long, and Hannah knows just what to do, and Mother said we
were to mind her, so I suppose we must, but it doesn't seem quite
right to me."

     "Hum, well, I can't say.  Suppose you ask Grandfather after
the doctor has been."

     "We will.  Jo, go and get Dr. Bangs at once," commanded Meg.
"We can't decide anything till he has been."

     "Stay where you are, Jo.  I'm errand boy to this establish-
ment," said Laurie, taking up his cap.

     "I'm afraid you are busy," began Meg.

     "No, I've done my lessons for the day."

     "Do you study in vacation time?" asked Jo.

     "I follow the good example my neighbors set me," was Laurie's
answer, as he swung himself out of the room.

     "I have great hopes for my boy," observed Jo, watching him
fly over the fence with an approving smile.

     "He does very well, for a boy," was Meg's somewhat ungracious
answer, for the subject did not interest her.

     Dr. Bangs  came, said Beth had symptoms of the fever, but he
thought she would have it lightly, though he looked sober over the
Hummel story.  Amy was ordered off at once, and provided with some-
thing to ward off danger, she departed in great state, with Jo and
Laurie as escort.

     Aunt March received them with her usual hospitality.

     "What do you want now?" she asked, looking sharply over her
spectacles, while the parrot, sitting on the back of her chair,
called out . . .

     "Go away.  No boys allowed her."

     Laurie retired to the window, and Jo told her story.

     "No more than I expected, if you are allowed to go poking
about among poor folks.  Amy can stay and make herself useful
if she isn't sick, which I've no doubt she will be, looks like
it now.  Don't cry, child, it worries me to hear people sniff."

     Amy was on the point of crying, but Laurie slyly pulled the
parrot's tail, which caused Polly to utter an astonished croak and
call out, "Bless my boots!" in such a funny way, that she laughed
instead.

     "What do you hear from your mother?" asked the old lady
gruffly.

     "Father is much better," replied Jo, trying to keep sober.

     "Oh, is her?  Well, that won't last long, I fancy.  March
never had any stamina," was the cheerful reply.

     "Ha, ha!  Never say die, take a pinch of snuff, goodbye, good-
bye!" squalled Polly, dancing on her perch, and clawing at the old
lady's cap as Laurie tweaked him in the rear.

     "Hold your tongue, you disrespectful old bird!  And, Jo, you'd
better go at once.  It isn't proper to be gadding about so late with
a rattlepated boy like . . ."

     "Hold your tongue, you disrespectful old bird!" cried Polly,
tumbling off the chair with a bounce, and running to peck the
`rattlepated' boy, who was shaking with laughter at the last speech.

     "I don't think I can bear it, but I'll try," thought Amy, as
she was left alone with Aunt March.

     "Get along, you fright!" screamed Polly, and at that rude speech
Amy could not restrain a sniff.


                           CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

     Beth did have the fever, and was much sicker than anyone but
Hannah and the doctor suspected.  The girls knew nothing about ill-
ness, and Mr. Laurence was not allowed to see her, so Hannah had
everything her own way, and busy Dr. Bangs did his best, but left a
good deal to the excellent nurse.  Meg stayed at home, lest she
should infect the Kings, and kept house, feeling very anxious and a
little guilty when she wrote letters in which no mention was made of
Beth's illness.  She could not think it right to deceive her mother,
but she had been bidden to mind Hannah, and Hannah wouldn't hear of
`Mrs. March bein' told, and worried just for sech a trifle.'

     Jo devoted herself to Beth day and night, not a hard task, for
Beth was very patient, and bore her pain uncomplainingly as long as
she could control herself.  But there came a time when during the
fever fits she began to talk in a hoarse, broken voice, to play on
the coverlet as if on her beloved little piano, and try to sing with
a throat so swollen that there was no music left, a time when she
did not know the familiar faces around her, but addressed them by
wrong names, and called imploringly for her mother.  Then Jo grew
frightened, Meg begged to be allowed to write the truth, and even
Hannah said she `would think of it, though there was no danger
yet'.  A letter from Washington added to their trouble, for Mr.
March had had a relapse, and could not think of coming home for a
long while.

     How dark the days seemed now, how sad and lonely the house,
and how heavy were the hearts of the sisters as they worked and
waited, while the shadow of death hovered over the once happy home.
Then it was that Margaret, sitting alone with tears dropping often
on her work, felt how rich she had been in things more precious
than any luxuries money could buy--in love, protection,, peace, and
health, the real blessings of life.  Then it was that Jo, living in
the darkened room, with that suffering little sister always before
her eyes and that pathetic voice sounding in her ears, learned to
see the beauty and to sweetness of Beth's nature, to feel how deep
and tender a place she filled in all hearts, and to acknowledge the
worth of Beth's unselfish ambition to live for others, and make
home happy by that exercise of those simple virtues which all may
possess, and which all should love and value more than talent, wealth,
or beauty.  And Amy, in her exile, longed eagerly to be at home, that
she might work for Beth, feeling now that no service would be hard or
irksome, and remembering, with regretful grief, how many neglected
tasks those willing hands had done for her.  Laurie haunted the house
like a restless ghost, and Mr. Laurence locke the grand piano, because
he could not bear to be reminded of the young neighbor who used to
make the twilight pleasant for him.  Everyone missed Beth.  The milk-
man, baker, grocer, and butcher inquired how she did, poor Mrs.
Hummel came to beg pardon for her thoughtlessness and to get a shroud
for Minna, the neighbors sent all sorts of comforts and good wishes,
and even those who knew her best were surprised to find how many
friends shy little Beth had made.

     Meanwhile she lay on her bed with old Joanna at her side, for
even in her wanderings she did not forget her forlorn protege.  She
longed for her cats, but would not have them brought, lest they
should get sick, and in her quiet hours she was full of anxiety
about Jo.  She sent loving messages to Amy, bade them tell her mother
that she would write soon, and often begged for pencil and paper to
try to say a word, that Father might not think she had neglected him.
But soon even these intervals of consciousness ended, and she lay
hour after hour, tossing to and fro, with incoherent words on her
lips, or sank into a heavy sleep which brought her no refreshment.
Dr. Bangs came twice a day, Hannah sat up at night, Meg kept a
telegram in her desk all ready to send off at any minute, and Jo
never stirred from Beth's side.

     The first of December was a wintry day indeed to them, for a
bitter wind blew, snow fell fast, and the year seemed getting ready
for its death.  When Dr. Bangs came that morning, he looked long at
Beth, held the hot hand in both his own for a minute, and laid it
gently down, saying, in a low voice to Hannah, "If Mrs. March can
leave her husband she'd better be sent for."

     Hannah nodded without speaking, for her lips twitched nervously,
Meg dropped down into a chair as the strength seemed to go out of
her limbs at the sound of those words, and Jo, standing with a pale
face for a minute, ran to the parlor, snatched up the telegram, and
throwing on her things, rushed out into the storm.  She was soon
back, and while noiselessly taking off her cloak, Laurie came in
with a letter, saying that Mr. March was mending again.  Jo read
it thankfully, but the heavy weight did not seem lifted off her
heart, and her face was so full of misery that Laurie asked quickly,
"What is it?  Is Beth worse?"

     "I've sent for Mother," said Jo, tugging at her rubber boots
with a tragic expression.

     "Good for you, Jo!  Did you do it on your own responsibility?"
asked Laurie, as he seated her in the hall chair and took off the
rebellious boots, seeing how her hands shook.

     "No. The doctor told us to."

     "Oh, Jo, it's not so bad as that?" cried Laurie, with a
     startled face.

     "Yes, it is.  She doesn't know us, she doesn't even talk about
the flocks of green doves, as she calls the vine leaves on the wall.
She doesn't look like my Beth, and there's nobody to help us bear it.
Mother and father both gone, and God seems so far away I can't find
Him."

     As the tears streamed fast down poor Jo's cheeks, she stretched
out her hand in a helpless sort of way, as if groping in the dark,
and Laurie took it in his, whispering as well as he could with a
lump in his throat, "I'm here.  Hold on tome, Jo, dear!"

     She could not speak, but she did `hold on', and the warm grasp
of the friendly human hand comforted her sore heart, and seemed to
lead her nearer to the Divine arm which alone could uphold her in
her trouble.

      Laurie longed to say something tender and comfortable, but no
fitting words came to him, so he stood silent, gently stroking her
bent head as her mother used to do.  It was the best thing he could
have done, far more soothing than the most eloquent words, for Jo
felt the unspoken sympathy, and in the silence learned the sweet
solace which affection administers to sorrow.  Soon she dried the
tears which had relieved her, and looked up with a grateful face.

     "Thank you, Teddy, I'm better now.  I don't feel so forlorn,
and will try to bear it if it comes."

     "Keep hoping for the best, that will help you, Jo.  Soon your
mother will be here, and then everything will be all right."

     "I'm so glad Father is better.  Now she won't feel so bad about
leaving him.  Oh, me!  It does seem as if all the troubles came in
a heap, and I got the heaviest part on my shoulders," sighed Jo,
spreading her wet handkerchief over her knees to dry.

     "Doesn't Meg pull fair?" asked Laurie, looking indignant.

     "Oh, yes, she tries to, but she can't love Bethy as I do, and
she won't miss her as I shall.  Beth is my conscience, and I can't
give her up.  I can't!  I can't!"

     Down went Jo's face into the wet handkerchief, and she cried
despairingly, for she had kept up bravely till now and never shed
a tear.  Laurie drew his hand across his eyes, but could not speak
till he had subdued the choky feeling in his throat and steadied his
lips.  It might be unmanly, but he couldn't help it, and I am glad
of it.  Presently, as Jo's sobs quieted, he said hopefully, "I
don't think she will die.  She's so good, and we all love her so
much, I don't believe God will take her away yet."

     "The good and dear people always do die," groaned Jo, but she
stopped crying, for her friend's words cheered her up in spite of
her own doubts and fears.

     "Poor girl, you're worn out.  It isn't like you to be forlorn.
Stop a bit.  I'll hearten you up in a jiffy."

     Laurie went off two stairs at a time, and Jo laid her wearied
head down on Beth's little brown hood, which no one had thought of
moving from the table where she left it.  It must have possessed
some magic, for the submissive spirit of its gentle owner seemed
to enter into Jo, and when Laurie came running down with a glass
of wine, she took it with a smile, and said bravely, "I drink--
Health to my Beth!  You are a good doctor, Teddy, and such a comfort-
able friend.  How can I ever pay you?"  she added, as the wine
refreshed her body, as the kind words had done her troubled mind.

     "I'll send my bill, by-and-by, and tonight I'll give you some-
thing that will warm the cockles of your heart better than quarts
of wine," said Laurie, beaming at her with a face of suppressed
satisfaction at something.

     "what is it?" cried Jo, forgetting her woes for a minute in
her wonder.

     "I telegraphed to your mother yesterday, and Brooke answered
she'd come at once, and she'll be here tonight, and everything will
be all right.  Aren't you glad I did it?"

     Laurie spoke very fast, and turned red and excited all in a
minute, for he had kept his plot a secret, for fear of disappoint-
ing the girls or harming Beth.  Jo grew quite white, flew out of
her chair, and the moment he stopped speaking she electrified him
by throwing her arms round his neck, and crying out, with a joyful
cry, "Oh, Laurie!  Oh, Mother!  I am so glad!"  She did not weep
again, but laughed hysterically, and trembled and clung to her
friend as if she was a little bewildered by the sudden news.

     Laurie, though decidedly amazed, behaved with great pres-
ence of mind.  He patted her back soothingly, and finding that she
was recovering, followed it up by a bashful kiss or two, which
brought Jo round at once.  Holding on to the banisters, she put
him gently away, saying breathlessly, "Oh, don't!  I didn't  mean
to, it was dreadful of me, but you were such a dear to go and do
it in spite of Hannah that I couldn't help flying at you.  Tell
me all about it, and don't give me wine again, it makes me act so."

     "I don't mind," laughed Laurie, as he settled his tie.  "Why,
you see I got fidgety, and so did Grandpa.  We thought Hannah was
overdoing the authority business, and your mother ought to know.
She'd never forgive us if Beth . . .  Well, if anything happened,
you know.  So I got grandpa to say it was high time we did something,
and off I pelted to the office yesterday, for the doctor looked sober,
and Hannah most took my head off when I proposed a telegram.  I never
can bear to be `lorded over', so that settled my mind, and I did it.
Your mother will come, I know, and the late train is in at two A.M.
I shall go for her, and you've only got to bottle up your rapture,
and keep Beth quiet till that blessed lady gets here."

     "Laurie, you're an angel!  How shall I ever thank you?"

     "Fly at me again.  I rather liked it," said Laurie, looking
mischievous, a thing he had not done for a fortnight.

     "No, thank you.  I'll do it by proxy, when your grandpa comes.
Don't tease, but go home and rest, for you'll be up half the night.
Bless you, Teddy, bless you!"

     Jo had backed into a corner, and as she finished her speech,
she vanished precipitately into the kitchen, where she sat down
upon a dresser and told the assembled cats that she was "happy,
oh, so happy!" while Laurie departed, feeling that he had made a
rather neat thing of it.

     "That's the interferingest chap I ever see, but I forgive
him and do hope Mrs. March is coming right away," said Hannah,
with an air of relief, when Jo told the good news.

     Meg had a quiet rapture, and then brooded over the letter,
while Jo set the sickroom in order, and Hannah `knocked up a
couple of pies in case of company unexpected".  A breath of
fresh air seemed to blow through the house, and something better
than sunshine brightened the quiet rooms.  Everything appeared
to feel the hopeful change.  Beth's bird began to chirp again,
and a half-blown rose was discovered on Amy's bush in the window.
The fires seemed to burn with unusual cheeriness, and every time
the girls met, their pale faces broke into smiles as they hugged
one another, whispering encouragingly, "Mother's coming, dear!
Mother's coming!"  Every one rejoiced but Beth.  She lay in that
heavy stupor, alike unconscious of hope and joy, doubt and danger.
It was a piteous sight, the once rosy face so changed and vacant,
the once busy hands so weak and wasted, the once smiling lips
quite dumb, and the once pretty, well-kept hair scattered rough
and tangled on the pillow.  All day she say so, only rousing now
and then to mutter, "Water!" with lips so parched they could
hardly shape the word.  All day Jo and Meg hovered over her,
watching, waiting, hoping, and trusting in God and Mother, and
all day the snow fell, the bitter wind raged, and the hours
dragged slowly by.  But night came at last, and every time
the clock struck, the sisters, still sitting on either side of
the bed, looked at each other with brightening eyes, for each
hour brought help nearer.  The doctor had been in to say that
some change, for better or worse, would probably take place
about midnight, at which time he would return.

     Hannah, quite worn out, lay down on the sofa at the bed's
foot and fell fast asleep, Mr. Laurence marched to and fro in the
parlor, feeling that he would rather face a rebel battery than
Mrs. March's countenance as she entered.  Laurie lay on the rug,
pretending to rest, but staring into the fire with the thoughtful
look which made his black eyes beautifully soft and clear.

     The girls never forgot that night, for no sleep came to them
as they kept their watch, with that dreadful sense of powerless-
ness which comes to us in hours like those.

     "If God spares Beth, I never will complain again," whispered
Meg earnestly.

     "If god spares Beth, I'll try to love and serve Him all my
life," answered Jo, with equal fervor.

     "I wish I had no heart, it aches so," sighed Meg, after a
pause.

     "If life is often as hard as this, I don't see how we ever
shall get through it," added her sister despondently.

     Here the clock struck twelve, and both forgot themselves in
watching Beth, for they fancied a change passed over her wan face.
The house was still as death, and nothing but the wailing of the
wind broke the deep hush.  Weary Hannah slept on, and no one but
the sisters saw the pale shadow which seemed to fall upon the
little bed.  An hour went by, and nothing happened except Laurie's
quiet departure for the station.  Another hour, still no one came,
and anxious fears of delay in the storm, or accidents by the way,
or, worst of all, a great grief at Washington, haunted the girls.

     It was past two, when Jo, who stood at the window thinking
how dreary the world looked in its winding sheet of snow, heard
a movement by the bed, and turning quickly, saw Meg kneeling
before their mother's easy chair with her face hidden.  A dreadful
fear passed coldly over Jo, as she thought, "Beth is dead, and Meg
is afraid to tell me."

     She was back at her post in an instant, and to her excited
eyes a great change seemed to have taken place.  The fever flush
and the look of pain were gone, and the beloved little face looked
so pale and peaceful in its utter repose that Jo felt no desire to
weep or to lament.  Leaning low over this dearest of her sisters,
she kissed the damp forehead with her heart on her lips, and softly
whispered, "Goodby, my Beth. Goodby!"

     As if awaked by the stir, Hannah started out of her sleep,
hurried to the bed, looked at Beth, felt her hands, listened at
her lips, and then, throwing her apron over her head, sat down
to rock to and fro, exclaiming, under her breath, "The fever's
turned, she's sleepin' nat'ral, her skin's damp, and she breathes
easy.  Praise be given!  Oh, my goodness me!"

     Before the girls could believe the happy truth, the doctor
came to confirm it.  He was a homely man, but they thought his
face quite heavenly when he smiled and said, with a fatherly look
at them, "Yes, my dears, I think the little girl will pull through
this time.  Keep the house quiet, let her sleep, and when she wakes,
give her . . ."

     What they were to give, neither heard, for both crept into
the dark hall, and, sitting on the stairs, held each other close,
rejoicing with hearts too full for words.  When they went back to
be kissed and cuddled by faithful Hannah, they found Beth lying,,
as she used to do, with her cheek pillowed on her hand, the
dreadful pallor gone, and breathing quietly, as if just fallen
asleep.

     "If Mother would only come now!" said Jo, as the winter night
began to wane.

     "See," said Meg, coming up with a white, half-opened rose,
"I thought this would hardly be ready to lay in Beth's hand to-
morrow if she--went away from us.  But it has blossomed in the
night, and now I mean to put it in my vase here, so that when
the darling wakes, the first thing she sees will be the little
rose, and Mother's face."

     Never had the sun risen so beautifully, and never had the
world seemed so lovely as it did to the heavy eyes of Meg and Jo,
as they looked out in the early morning, when their long, sad
vigil was done.

     "It looks like a fairy world," said Meg, smiling to herself,
as she stood behind the curtain, watching the dazzling sight.

     "Hark!" cried Jo, starting to her feet.

     Yes, there was a sound of bells at the door below, a cry
from Hannah, and then Laurie's voice saying in a joyful whisper,
"Girls, she's come!  She's come!"

                           CHAPTER NINETEEN

     While these things were happening at home, Amy was having
hard times at Aunt March's.  She felt her exile deeply, and
for the first time in her life, realized how much she was be-
loved and petted at home.  Aunt March never petted any one. She
did not approve of it, but she meant to be kind, for the well-
behaved little girl pleased her very much, and Aunt March had
a soft place in her old heart for her nephew's children, though
she didn't think it proper to confess it.  She really did her
best to make Amy happy, but, dear me, what mistakes she made.
Some old people keep young at heart in spite of wrinkles and
gray hairs, can sympathize with children's little cares and
joys, make them feel at home, and can hide wise lessons under
pleasant plays, giving and receiving friendship in the sweetest
way.  But Aunt March had not this gift, and she worried Amy very
much with her rules and orders, her prim ways, and long, prosy
talks.  Finding the child more docile and amiable than her sister,
the old lady felt it her duty to try and counteract, as far as
possible, the bad effects of home freedom and indulgence.  So she
took Amy by the hand, and taught her as she herself had been
taught sixty years ago, a process which carried dismay to Amy's
soul, and made her feel like a fly in the web of a very strict
spider.

     She had to wash the cups every morning, and polish up the
old-fashioned spoons, the fat silver teapot, and the glasses till
they shone.  Then she must dust the room, and what a trying job
that was.  Not a speck escaped Aunt March's eye, and all the
furniture had claw legs and much carving, which was never dusted
to suit.  Then Polly had to be fed, the lap dog combed, and a
dozen trips upstairs and down to get things or deliver orders,
for the old lady was very lame and seldom left her big chair. After
these tiresome labors, she must do her lessons, which was a daily
trial of every virtue she possessed.  Then she was allowed one
hour for exercise or play, and didn't she enjoy it?

     Laurie came every day, and wheedled Aunt March till Amy was
allowed to go out with him, when they walked and rode and had
capital times.  After dinner, she had to read aloud, and sit still
while the old lady slept, which she usually did for an hour, as
she dropped off over the first page.  Then patchwork or towels
appeared, and Amy sewed with outward meekness and inward rebell-
ion till dusk, when she was allowed to amuse herself as she liked
till teatime.  The evenings were the worst of all, for Aunt March
fell to telling long stories about her youth, which were so un-
utterably dull that Amy was always ready to go to be, intending
to cry over her hard fate, but usually going to sleep before
she had squeezed out more than a tear or two.

     If it had not been for Laurie, and old Esther, the maid,
she felt  that she never could have got through that dreadful
time.  The parrot alone was enough to drive her distracted, for
he soon felt that she did not admire him, and revenged himself
by being as mischievous as possible.  He pulled her hair when-
ever she came near him, upset his bread and milk to plague her
when she had newly cleaned his cage, made Mop bark by pecking
at him while Madam dozed, called her names before company, and
behaved in all respects like an reprehensible old bird.  Then she
could not endure the dog, a fat, cross beast who snarled and
yelped at her when she made his toilet, and who lay on his back
with all his legs in the air and a most idiotic expression of
countenance when he wanted something to eat, which was about a
dozen times a day.  The cook was bad-tempered, the old coachman
was deaf, and Esther the only one who ever took any notice of
the young lady.

     Esther was a Frenchwoman, who had lived with`Madame', as
she called her mistress, for many years, and who rather tyrann-
ized over the old lady, who could not get along without her.  Her
real name was Estelle, but Aunt March ordered her to change it,
and she obeyed, on condition that she was never asked to change
her religion.  She took a fancy to Mademoiselle, and amused her
very much with odd stories of her life in France, when Amy sat
with her while she got up Madam's laces.  She also allowed her to
roam about the great house, and examine the curious and pretty
things stored away in the big wardrobes and the ancient chests,
for Aunt March hoarded like a magpie.  Amy's chief delight was
an Indian cabinet, full of queer drawers, little pigeonholes,
and secret places, in which were kept all sorts of ornaments,
some precious, some merely curious, all more or less antique. To
examine and arrange these things gave Amy great satisfaction,
especially the jewel cases, in which on velvet cushions reposed
the ornaments which had adorned a belle forty years ago.  There
was the garnet set which Aunt March wore when she came out, the
pearls her father gave her on her wedding day, her lover's diamonds,
the jet mourning rings and pins, the queer lockets, with portraits
of dead friends and weeping willows made of hair inside,the baby
bracelets her one little daughter had worn, Uncle March's big
watch, with the red seal so many childish hands had played with,
and in a box all by itself lay Aunt March's wedding ring, too small
now for her fat finger, but put carefully away like the most prec-
ious jewel of them all.

     "Which would Mademoiselle choose if she had her will?" asked
Esther, wo always sat near to watch over and lock up the valuables.

     "I like the diamonds best, but there is no necklace among them,
and I'm fond of necklaces, they are so becoming.  I should choose
this if I might," replied Amy, looking with great admiration at a
string of gold and ebony beads from which hung a heavy cross of
the same.

     "I, too, covet that, but not as a necklace.  Ah, no!  To me it
is a rosary, and as such I should use it like a good catholic," said
Esther, eyeing the handsome thing wistfully.

     "Is it meant to use as you use the string of good-smelling
wooden beads hanging over your glass?" asked Amy.

     "Truly, yes, to pray with.  It would be pleasing to the saints
if one used so fine a rosary as this, instead of wearing it as a
vain bijou."

     "You seem to take a great deal of comfort in your prayers,
Esther, and always come down looking quiet and satisfied.  I wish
I could."

     "If Mademoiselle was a Catholic, she would find true comfort,
but as that is not to be, it would be well if you went apart each
day to meditate and pray, as did the good mistress whom I served
before Madame.  She had a little chapel, and in it found solace-
ment for much trouble."

     "Would it be right for me to do so too?"  asked Amy, who in
her loneliness felt the need of help of some sort, and found that
she was apt to forget her little book, now that Beth was not there
to remind her of it.

     "It would be excellent and charming, and I shall gladly
arrange the little dressing room for you if you like it.  Say
nothing to Madame, but when she sleeps go you and sit alone a
while to think good thoughts, and pray the dear God preserve
your sister."

     Esther was truly pious, and quite sincere in her advice, for
she had an affectionate heart, and felt much for the sisters in
their anxiety.  Amy liked the idea, and gave her leave to arrange
the light closet next her room, hoping it would do her good.

     "I wish I knew where all these pretty things would go when
Aunt March dies," she said, as she slowly replaced the shining
rosary and shut the jewel cases one by one.

     "To you and your sisters.  I know it, Madame confides in me.
I witnessed her will, and it is to be so," whispered Esther smiling.


     "How nice!  But I wish she'd let us have them now.  Procras-
tination is not agreeable," observed Amy, taking a last look at
the diamonds.

     "It is too soon yet for the young ladies to wear these things.
The first one who is affianced will have the pearls, Madame has said
it, and I have a fancy that the little turquoise ring will be given
to you when you go, for Madame approves your good behavior and
charming manners."

     "Do you think so?  Oh, I'll be a lamb, if I can only have that
lovely ring!  It's ever so much prettier than Kitty Bryant's.  I do
like Aunt March after all." And Amy tried on the blue ring with a
delighted face and a firm resolve to earn it.

     From that day she was a model of obedience, and the old lady
complacently admired the success of her training.  Esther  fitted
up the closet with a little table, placed a footstool before it,
and over it a picture taken from one of the shut-up rooms.  She
thought it was of no great value, but, being appropriate, she
borrowed it, well knowing that Madame would never know it, nor
care if she did.  It was, however, a very valuable copy of one of
the famous pictures of the world, and Amy's beauty-loving eyes were
never tired of looking up at the sweet face of the Divine Mother,
while her tender thoughts of her own were busy at her heart.  On
the table she laid her little testament and hymnbook, kept a vase
always full of the best flowers Laurie brought her, and came every
day to `sit alone' thinking good thoughts, and praying the dear
God to preserve her sister.  Esther had given her a rosary of black
beads with a silver cross, but Amy hung it up and did not use it,
feeling doubtful as to its fitness for Protestant prayers.

     The little girl was very sincere in all this, for being left
alone outside the safe home nest, she felt the need of some kind
hand to hold by so sorely that she instinctively turned to the
strong and tender Friend, whose fatherly love most closely surr-
ounds His little children.  She missed her mother's help to under-
stand and rule herself, but having been taught where to look,
she did her best to find the way and walk in it confidingly.  But
Amy was a young pilgrim, and just now her burden seemed very heavy.
She tried to forget herself, to keep cheerful, and be satisfied with
doing right, though no one saw or praised her for it.  In her first
effort  at being very, very good, she decided to make her will, as
Aunt March had done, so that if she did fall ill and die, her poss-
essions might be justly and generously divided.  It cost her a pang
even to think of giving up the little treasures which in her eyes
were as precious as the old lady's jewels.

     During one of her play hours she wrote out the important
document as well as she could, with some help from Esther as
to certain legal terms, and when the good-natured Frenchwoman
had signed her name, Amy felt relieved and laid it by to show
Laurie, whom she wanted as a second witness.  As it was a rainy
day, she went upstairs to amuse herself in one of the large
chambers, and took Polly with her for company.  In this room
there was a wardrobe full of old-fashioned costumes with which
Esther allowed her to play, and it was her favorite amusement to
array herself in the faded brocades, and parade up and down before
the long mirror, making stately curtsies, and sweeping her train
about with a rustle which delighted her ears.  So busy was she on
this day that she did not hear Laurie's ring nor see his face
peeping in at her as she gravely promenaded to and fro, flirting
her fan and tossing her head, on which she wore a great pink turban,
contrasting oddly with her blue brocade dress and yellow quilted
petticoat.  She was obliged to walk carefully, for she had on high-
heeled shoes, and, as Laurie told Jo afterward, it was a comical
sight to see her mince along in her gay suit, with Polly sidilng
and bridling just behind her, imitating her as well as he could,
and occasionally stopping to laugh or exclaim,  "Ain't we fine?
Get along, you fright!  Hold your tongue!  Kiss me, dear!  Ha! Ha!"

     Having with difficulty restrained an explosion of merriment,
lest it should offend her majesty, Laurie tapped and was graciously
received.

     "Sit down and rest while I put these things away, then I want
to consult you about a very serious matter," said Amy, when she
had shown her splendor and driven Polly into a corner.  "That bird
is the trial of my life," she continued, removing the pink mountain
from her head, while Laurie seated himself astride a chair.  "Yes-
terday, when Aunt was asleep and I was trying to be as still as a
mouse, Polly began to squall and flap about in his cage, so I went
to let him out, and found a big spider there.  I poked it out, and
it ran under the bookcase.  Polly marched straight after it, stooped
down and peeped under the bookcase, saying, in his funny way, with a
cock of his eye, `Come out and take a walk, my dear.' I couldn't
help laughing, which made Poll swear, and Aunt woke up and scolded
us both."

     "Did the spider accept the old fellow's invitation?" asked Laurie,
yawning.

     "Yes, out it came, and away ran Polly, frightened to death, and
scrambled up on Aunt's chair, calling out, `Catch her! Catch her!
Catch her!' as I chased the spider."

     "That's a lie!  Oh, lor!" cried the parrot, pecking at Laurie's
toes.

     "I'd wring your neck if you were mine, you old torment," cried
Laurie, shaking his fist at the bird, who put his head on one side
and gravely croaked, "Allyluyer!  Bless your buttons, dear!"

     "Now I'm ready," said Amy, shutting the wardrobe and taking a
piece of paper out of her pocket.  "I want you to read that, please,
and tell me if it is legal and right.  I felt I ought to do it, for
life is uncertain and I don't want any ill feeling over my tomb."

     Laurie bit his lips, and turning a little from the pensive
speaker, read the following document, with praiseworthy gravity,
considering the spelling:

                     MY LAST WILL AND TESTIMENT

     I, Amy Curtis March, being in my sane mind, go give and
bequeethe all my earthly property--viz.to wit:--namely

     To my father, my best pictures, sketches, maps, and works
of art, including frames.  Also my $100, to do what he likes with.

     To my mother, all my clothes, except the blue apron with
     pockets--also my likeness, and my medal, with much love.

     To my dear sister Margaret, I give my turkquoise ring (if I
get it), also my green box with the doves on it, also my; piece
of real lace for her neck, and my sketch of her as a memorial of
her 'little girl'.

     To Jo I leave my breastpin, the one mended with sealing wax,
also my bronze inkstand--she lost the cover--and my most precious
plaster rabbit, because I am sorry I burned up her story.

     To Beth (if she lives after me) I give my dolls and the
little bureau, my fan, my linen collars and my new slippers if
she can wear them being thin when she gets well.  And I herewith
also leave her my regret that I ever made fun of old Joanna.

     To my friend and neighbor Theodore Laurence I bequeethe my
paper mashay portfolio, my clay model of a horse though he did
say it hadn't any neck.  Also in return for his great kindness
in the hour of affliction any one of my artistic works he likes,
Noter Dame is the best.

     To our venerable benefactor Mr. Laurence I leave my purple
box with a looking glass in the cover which will be nice for
his pens and remind him of the departed girl who thanks him
for his favors to her family, especially Beth.

     I wish my favorite playmate Kitty Bryant to have the blue
silk apron and my gold-bead ring with a kiss.

     To Hannah I give the bandbox she wanted and all the patch-
work I leave hoping she `will remember me, when it you see'.

     And now having disposed of my most valuable property I hope
all will be satisfied and not blame the dead.  I forgive every-
one, and trust we may all meet when the trump shall sound.  Amen.

     To this will and testiment I set my hand and seal on this
20th day of Nov. Anni Domino 1861.

                                              AMY CURTIS MARCH

     WITNESSES:

         ESTELLE VALNOR,
         THEODORE LAURENCE.

     The last name was written in pencil, and Amy explained
that he was to rewrite it in ink and seal it up for her properly.

     "What put it into your head?  Did anyone tell you about Beth's
giving away her things?" asked Laurie soberly, as Amy laid a bit
of red tape, with sealing wax, a taper, and a standish before him.

     She explained and then asked anxiously, "What about Beth?"

     "I'm sorry I spoke, but as I did, I'll tell you.  She felt so
ill one day that she told Jo she wanted to give her piano to Meg,
her cats to you, and the poor old doll to Jo, who would love it for
her sake.  She was sorry she had so little to give, and left locks
of hair to the rest of us, and her best love to Grandpa.  She never
thought of a will."

     Laurie was signing and sealing as he spoke, and did not look
up till a great tear dropped on the paper.  Amy's face was full
of trouble, but she only said, "Don't people put sort of post-
scripts to their wills, sometimes?"

     "Yes, `codicils', they call them."

     "Put one in mine then, that I wish all my curls cut off, and
given round to my friends.  I forgot it, but I want it done though
it will spoil my looks."

     Laurie added it, smiling at Amy's last and greatest sacrifice.
Then he amused her for an hour, and was much  interested in all her
trials.  But when he came to go, Amy held him back to whisper with
trembling lips, "Is there really any danger about Beth?"

     "I'm afraid there is, but we must hope for the best, so don't
cry, dear."  And Laurie put his arm about her with a brotherly
gesture which was very comforting.

     When he had gone, she went to her little chapel, and sitting
in the twilight, prayed for Beth, with streaming tears and an
aching heart, feeling that a million turquoise rings would not
console her for the loss of her gentle little sister.

                            CHAPTER TWENTY

     I don't think I have any words in which to tell the meeting
of the mother and daughters.  Such hours are beautiful to live,
but very hard to describe, so I will leave it to the imagination
of my readers, merely saying that the house was full of genuine
happiness, and that Meg's tender hope was realized, for when Beth
woke from that long, healing sleep, the first objects on which
her eyes fell were the little rose and Mother's face.  Too weak
to wonder at anything, she only smiled and nestled close in the
loving arms about her, feeling that the hungry longing was sat-
isfied at last. Then she slept again, and the girls waited upon
their mother, for she would not unclasp the thin hand which
clung to hers even in sleep.

     Hannah had `dished up' and astonishing breakfast for the
traveler, finding it impossible to vent her excitement in any
other way, and Meg and Jo fed their mother like dutiful young
storks, while they listened to her whispered account of Father's
state, Mr. Brooke's promise to stay and nurse him, the delays
which the storm occasioned on the homeward journey, and the
unspeakable comfort Laurie's hopeful face had given her when she
arrived, worn out with fatigue, anxiety, and cold.

     What a strange yet pleasant day that was.  So brilliant and
gay without, for all the world seemed abroad to welcome the first
snow.  So quiet and reposeful within, for everyone slept, spent
with watching, and a Sabbath stillness reigned through the house,
while nodding Hannah mounted guard at the door.  With a blissful
sense of burdens lifted off, Meg and Jo closed their weary eyes,
and lay at rest, like storm-beaten boats safe at anchor in a
quiet harbor.  Mrs. March would not leave Beth's side, but rested
in the big chair, waking often to look at, touch, and brood over
her child, like a miser over some recovered treasure.

     Laurie meanwhile posted off to comfort Amy, and told his
story so well that Aunt March actually `sniffed' herself, and
never once said "I told you so".  Amy came out so strong on
this occasion that I think the good thoughts in the little chapel
really began to bear fruit.  She dried her tears quickly, restrain-
ed her impatience to see her mother, and never even thought of the
turquoise ring, when the old lady heartily agreed in Laurie's
opinion, that she behaved `like a capital little woman'.  Even
Polly seemed impressed, for he called her a good girl, blessed
her buttons, and begged her to "come and take a walk, dear", in
his most affable tone.  She would very gladly have gone out to
enjoy the bright wintry weather, but discovering that Laurie
was dropping with sleep in spite of manful efforts to conceal
the fact, she persuaded him to rest on the sofa, while she wrote
a note to her mother.  She was a long time about it, and when she
returned, he was stretched out with both arms under his head,
sound asleep, while Aunt March had pulled down the curtains and
sat doing nothing in an unusual fit of benignity.

     After a while, they began to think he was not going to wake
up till night, and I'm not sure that he would, had he not been
effectually roused by Amy's cry of joy at sight of her mother.
There probably were a good many happy little girls in and about
the city that day, but it is my private opinion that Amy was the
happiest of all, when she sat in her mother's lap and told her
trials, receiving consolation and compensation in the shape of
approving smiles and fond caresses.  They were alone together
in the chapel, to which her mother did not object when its
purpose was explained to her.

     "On the contrary, I like it very much, dear," looking from
the dusty rosary to the well-worn little book, and the lovely
picture with its garland of evergreen.  "It is an excellent plan
to have some place where we can go to be quiet, when things vex
or grieve us.  There are a good many hard times in this life of
ours, but we can always bear them if we ask help in the right
way.  I think my little girl is learning this."

     "Yes, Mother, and when I go home I mean to have a corner
in the big closet to put my books and the copy of that picture
which I've tried to make.  The woman's face is not good, it's
too beautiful for me to draw, but the baby is done better, and
I love it very much.  I like to think He was a little child once,
for then I don't seem so far away, and that helps me."

     As Amy pointed to the smiling Christ child on his Mother's
knee, Mrs. March saw something on the lifted hand that made her
smile.  She said nothing, but Amy understood the look, and after
a minute's pause, she added gravely, "I wanted to speak to you
about this, but I forgot it.  Aunt gave me the ring today. She
called me to her and kissed me, and put it on my finger, and
said I was a credit to her, and she'd like to keep me always.
She gave that funny guard to keep the turquoise on, as it's too
big.  I'd like to wear them Mother, can I?"

     "They are very pretty, but I think you're rather too young
for such ornaments, Amy," said Mrs. March, looking at the plump
little hand, with the band of sky-blue stones on the forefinger,
and the quaint guard formed of two tiny golden hands clasped
together.

     "I'll try not to be vain," said Amy.  "I don't think I like
it only because it's so pretty, but I want to wear it as the girl
in the story wore her bracelet, to remind me of something."

     "Do you mean Aunt March?" asked her mother, laughing.

     "No, to remind me not to be selfish."  Amy looked so
earnest and sincere about it that her mother stopped laughing,
and listened respectfully to the little plan.

     "I've thought a great deal lately about my `bundle of
naughties', and being selfish is the largest one in it, so I'm
going to try hard to cure it, if I can. Beth isn't selfish, and
that's the reason everyone loves her and feels so bad at the
thoughts of losing her.  People wouldn't feel so bat about me
if I was sick, and I don't deserve to have them, but I'd like
to be loved and missed by a great many friends, so I'm going
to try and be like Beth all I can.  I'm apt to forget my res-
olutions, but if I had something always about me to remind me,
I guess I should do better.  May we try this way?"

     "Yes, but I have more faith in the corner of the big closet.
Wear your ring, dear, and do your best.  I think you will prosper,
for the sincere wish to be good is half the battle.  Now I must
go back to Beth.  Keep up your heart, little daughter, and we will
soon have you home again."

     That evening while Meg was writing to her father to report
the traveler's safe arrival, Jo slipped upstairs into Beth's room,
and finding her mother in her usual place, stood a minute twisting
her fingers in her hair, with a worried gesture and an undecided
look.

     "What is it, deary?' asked Mrs. March, holding out her hand,
with a face which invited confidence.

     "I want to tell you something, Mother."

     "About Meg?"

     "How quickly you guessed!  Yes, it's about her, and though
it's a little thing, it fidgets me."

     "Beth is asleep.  Speak low, and tell me all about it.  That
Moffat hasn't been here, I hope?" asked Mrs. March rather sharply.

     "No. I should have shut the door in his face if he had,"
said Jo, settling herself on the floor at her mother's feet. "Last
summer Meg left a pair of gloves over at the Laurences' and only
one was returned.  We forgot about it, till Teddy told me that Mr.
Brooke owned that he liked Meg but didn't dare say so, she was so
young and he so poor.  Now, isn't  it a dreadful state of things?"

     "Do you think Meg cares for him?" asked Mrs. March, with an
anxious look.

     "Mercy me!  I don't know anything about love and such non-
sense!" cried Jo, with a funny mixture of interest and contempt.
"In novels, the girls show it by starting and blushing, fainting
away, growing thin, and acting like fools.  Now Meg does not do
anything of the sort.  She eats and drinks and sleeps like a
sensible creature, she looks straight in my face when I talk
about that man, and only blushes a little bit when Teddy jokes
about lovers.  I forbid him to do it, but he doesn't mind me as
he ought."

     "Then you fancy that Meg is not interested in John?'

     "Who?" cried Jo, staring.

     "Mr. Brooke.  I call him `John' now.  We fell into the way
of doing so at the hospital, and he likes it."

     "Oh, dear!  I know you'll take his part.  He's been good to
Father, and you won't send him away, but let Meg marry him, if
she wants to.  Mean thing!  To go petting Papa and helping you,
just to wheedle you into liking him." And Jo pulled her hair
again with a wrathful tweak.

     "My dear, don't get angry about it, and I will tell you how
it happened.  John went with me at Mr. Laurence's request, and
was so devoted to poor Father that we couldn't help getting fond
of him.  He was perfectly open and honorable about Meg, for he
told us he loved her, but would earn a comfortable home before
he asked her to marry him.  He only wanted our leave to love her
and work for her, and the right to make her love him if he could.
He is a truly excellent young man, and we could not refuse to
listen to him, but I will not consent to Meg's engaging herself
so young."

     "Of course not.  It would be idiotic!  I knew there was
mischief brewing.  I felt it, and now it's worse than I imagined.
I just wish I could marry Meg myself, and keep her safe in the
family."

     This odd arrangement made Mrs. March smile, but she said
gravely, "Jo, I confide in you and don't wish you to say anything
to Meg yet.  When John comes back, and I see them together, I can
judge better of her feelings toward him."

     "She'll see those handsome eyes that she talks about, and
then it will be all up with her.  She's got such a soft heart,
it will melt like butter in the sun if anyone looks sentimentlly
at her.  She read the short reports he sent more than she did
your letters, and pinched me when I spoke of it, and likes brown
eyes, and doesn't think John an ugly name, and she'll go and fall
in love, and there's an end of peace and fun, and cozy times to-
gether.  I see it all!  They'll go lovering around the house, and
we shall have to dodge.  Meg will be absorbed and no good to me
any more.  Brooke will scratch up a fortune somehow, carry her off,
and make a hole in the family, and I shall break my heart, and
everything will be abominably uncomfortable.  Oh, dear me!  Why
weren't we all boys, then there wouldn't be any bother."

     Jo leaned her chin on her knees in a disconsolate attitude
and shook her fist at the reprehensible John.   Mrs. March sighed,
and Jo looked up with an air of relief.

     "You don't like it, Mother?  I'm glad of it.  Let's send him
about his business, and not tell Meg a word of it, but all be
happy together as we always have been."

     "I did wrong to sigh, Jo.  It is natural and right you should
all go to homes of your own in time, but I do want to keep my girls
as long as I can, and I am sorry that this happened so soon, for
Meg is only seventeen and it will be some years before John can
make a home for her.  Your father and I have agreed that she shall
not bind herself in any way, nor be married, before twenty.  If
she and John love one another, they can wait, and test the love
by doing so.  She is conscientious, and I have no fear of her
treating him unkindly.  My pretty, tender hearted girl!  I hope
things will go happily with her."

     "Hadn't you rather have her marry a rich man?" asked Jo, as
her mother's voice faltered a little over the last words.

     "Money is a good and useful thing, Jo, and I hope my girls
will never feel the need of it too bitterly not be tempted by
too much.  I should like to know that John was firmly established
in some good business, which gave him an income large enough to
keep free from debt and make Meg comfortable.  I'm not ambitious
for a splendid fortune, a fashionable position, or a great name
for my girls.  If rank and money come with love and virtue, also,
I should accept them gratefully, and enjoy your good fortune, but
I know, by experience, how much genuine happiness can be had in
a plain little house, where the daily bread is earned, and some
privations give sweetness to the few pleasures.  I am content to
see Meg begin humbly, for if I am not mistaken, she will be  rich
in the possession of a good man's heart, and that is better than
a fortune."

     "I understand, Mother, and quite agree, but I'm disappointed
about Meg, for I'd planned to have her marry Teddy by-and-by and
sit in the lap of luxury all her days.  Wouldn't it be nice?"
asked Jo, looking up with a brighter face.

     "He is younger than she, you know," began Mrs. March, but Jo
broke in . . .

     "Only a little, he's old for his age, and tall, and can be
quite grown-up in his manners if he likes.  Then he's rich and
generous and good, and loves us all, and I say it's a pity my
plan is spoiled."

     "I'm afraid Laurie is hardly grown-up enough for Meg, and
altogether too much of a weathercock just now for anyone to
depend on.  Don't make plans, Jo, but let time and their own
hearts mate your friends.  We can't meddle safely in such
matters, and had better not get `romantic rubbish' as you
call it, into our heads, lest it spoil our friendship."

     "Well, I won't, but I hate to see things going all criss-
cross and getting snarled up, when a pull her and a snip there
would straighten it out.  I wish wearing flatirons on our heads
would keep us from growing up.  But buds will be roses, and
kittens cats, more's the pity!"

     "What's that about flatirons and cats?" asked Meg, as she
crept into the room with the finished letter in her hand.

     "Only one of my stupid speeches.  I'm going to bed.  Come,
Peggy," said Jo, unfolding herself like an animated puzzle.

     "Quite right, and beautifully written.  Please add that I
send my love to John," said Mrs. March, as she glanced over
the letter and gave it back.

     "Do you call him `John'?"  asked Meg, smiling, with her
innocent eyes looking down into her mother's.

     "Yes, he has been like a son to us, and we are very fond
of him," replied Mrs. March, returning the look with a keen
one.

     "I'm glad of that, he is so lonely.  Good night, Mother,
dear.  It is so inexpressibly comfortable to have you here,"
was Meg's answer.

     The kiss her mother gave her was a very tender one, and
as she went away, Mrs. March said, with a mixture of satis-
faction and regret, "She does not love John yet, but will
soon learn to.

                         CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

     Jo's face was a study next day, for the secret rather weighed
upon her, and she found it hard not to look mysterious and impor-
tant.   Meg observed it, but did not trouble herself to make
inquiries, for she had learned that the best way to manage Jo was
by the law of contraries, so she felt sure of being told every-
thing if she did not ask.  She was rather surprised, therefore,
when the silence remained unbroken, and Jo assumed a patronizing
air, which decidedly aggravated Meg, who in turn assumed an air
of dignified reserve and devoted herself to her mother.  This left
Jo to her own devices, for Mrs. March had taken her place as nurse,
and bade her rest, exercise, and amuse herself after her long
confinement.  Amy being gone, Laurie was her only refuge, and much
as she enjoyed his society, she rather dreaded him just then, for
he was an incorrigible tease, and she feared he would coax the
secret from her.

     She was quite right, for the mischief-loving lad no sooner
suspected a mystery than he set himself to find it out, and led
Jo a trying life of it.  He wheedled, bribed, ridiculed, threat-
ened, and scolded; affected indifference, that he might surprise
the truth from her; declared her knew, then that he didn't care;
and at last, by dint of perseverance, he satisfied himself that
it concerned Meg and Mr. Brooke.  Feeling indignant that he was
not taken into his tutor's confidence, he set his wits to work
to devise some proper retaliation for the slight.

     Meg meanwhile had apparently forgotten the matter and was
absorbed in preparations for her father's return, but all of a
sudden a change seemed to come over her, and, for a day or two,
she was quite unlike herself.  She started when spoken to,
blushed when looked at, was very quiet, and sat over her sewing,
with a timid, troubled look on her face.  To her mother's inquiries
she answered that she was quite well, and Jo's she silenced by
begging to be let alone.

     "She feels it in the air--love, I mean--and she's going very
fast. She's got most of the symptoms--is twittery and cross,
doesn't eat, lies awake, and mopes in corners.  I caught her
singing that song he gave her, and once she said `John', as you
do, and then turned as red as a poppy.  whatever shall we do?"
said Jo, looking ready for any measures, however violent.

     "Nothing but wait.  Let her alone, be kind and patient, and
Father's coming will settle everything," replied her mother.

     "Here's a note to you, Meg, all sealed up.  How odd! Teddy
never seals mine," said Jo next day, as she distributed the
contents of the little post office.

     Mrs. March and Jo were deep in their own affairs, when a
sound from Meg made them look up to see her staring at her
note with a frightened face.

     "My child, what is it?" cried her mother, running to her,
while Jo tried to take the paper which had done the mischief.

     "It's all a mistake, he didn't send it.  Oh, Jo, how could
you do it?" and Meg hid her face in her hands, crying as if her
heart were quite broken.

     "Me!  I've done nothing!  What's she talking about?" cried
Jo, bewildered.

     Meg's mild eyes kindled with anger as she pulled a crumpled
note from her pocket and threw it at Jo, saying reproachfully,
"You wrote it, and that bad boy helped you.  How could you be
so rude, so mean, and cruel to us both?"

     Jo hardly heard her, for she and her mother were reading the
note, which was written in a peculiar hand.

     "My Dearest Margaret-

     "I can no longer restrain my passion, and must know my fate
before I return.  I dare not tell your parents yet, but I think
they would consent if they knew that we adored one another.  Mr.
Laurence will help me to some good place, and then, my sweet
girl, you will make me happy.  I implore you to say nothing to
your family yet, but to send one word of hope through Laurie to,

                                           "Your devoted John."

     "Oh, the little villain!  That's the way he meant to pay me
for keeping my word to Mother.  I'll give him a hearty scolding
and bring him over to beg pardon," cried Jo, burning to execute
immediate justice.  But her mother held her back, saying, with
a look she seldom wore . . .

     "Stop, Jo, you must clear yourself first.  You have played
so many pranks that I am afraid you have had a hand in this."

     "On my word, Mother, I haven't!  I never saw that note
before, and don't know anything about it, as true as I live!"
said Jo, so earnestly that they believed her.  "If I had taken
part in it I'd have done it better than this, and have written
a sensible note.  I should think you'd have known Mr. Brooke
wouldn't write such stuff as that," she added, scornfully toss-
ing down the paper.

     "It's like his writing," faltered Meg, comparing it with the
note in her hand.

     "Oh, Meg, you didn't answer it?" cried Mrs. March quickly.

     "Yes, I did!" and Meg hid her face again, overcome with
shame.

     "Here's a scrape!  Do let me bring that wicked boy over to
explain and be lectured.  I can't rest till I get hold of him."
And Jo made for the door again.

     "Hush!  Let me handle this, for it is worse than I thought.
Margaret, tell me the whole story," commanded Mrs. March, sitting
down by Meg, yet keeping hold of Jo, lest she should fly off.

     "I received the first letter from Laurie, who didn't look
as if he knew anything about it," began Meg, without looking up.
"I was worried at first and meant to tell you, then I remembered
how you liked Mr. Brooke, so I thought you wouldn't mind if I
kept my little secret for a few days.  I'm so silly that I liked
to think no one knew, and while I was deciding what to say, I
felt like the girls in books, who have such things to do.  Forgive
me, Mother, I'm paid for my silliness now.  I never can look him
in the face again."

     "What did you say to him?' asked Mrs. March.

     "I only said I was too young to do anything about it yet,
that I didn't wish to have secrets from you, and he must speak
to father.  I was very grateful for his kindness, and would be
his friend, but nothing more, for a long while."

     Mrs. March smiled, as if well pleased, and Jo clapped her
hands, exclaiming, with a laugh, "You are almost equal to
Caroline Percy, who was a pattern of prudence!  Tell on, Meg.
What did he say to that?"

     "He writes in a different way entirely, telling me that he
never sent any love letter at all, and is very sorry that my
roguish sister, Jo, should take liberties with our names.  It's
very kind and respectful, but think how dreadful for me!"

     Meg leaned against her mother, looking the image of despair,
and Jo tramped about the room, calling Laurie names.  All of a
sudden she stopped, caught up the two notes, and after looking
at them closely, said decidedly, "I don't believe Brooke ever
saw either of these letters.  Teddy wrote both, and keeps yours
to crow over me with because I wouldn't tell him my secret."

     "Don't have any secrets, Jo.  Tell it to Mother and keep
out of trouble, as I should have done," said Meg warningly.

     "Bless you, child!  Mother told me."

     "That will do, Jo.  I'll comfort Meg while you go and get
Laurie.   I shall sift the matter to the bottom, and put a stop
to such pranks at once."

     Away ran Jo, and Mrs. March gently told Meg Mr. Brooke's
real feelings.  "Now, dear, what are your own?  Do you love him
enough to wait till her can make a home for you, or will you
keep yourself quite free for the present?"

     "I've been so scared and worried, I don't want to have
anything to do with lovers for a long while, perhaps never,"
answered Meg petulantly.  "If John doesn't know anything about
this nonsense, don't tell him, and make Jo and Laurie hold their
tongues.  I won't be deceived and plagued and made a fool of.
It's a shame!"

     Seeing Meg's usually gentle temper was roused and her
pride hurt by this mischievous joke, Mrs. March soothed her
by promises of entire silence and great discretion for the
future.  The instant Laurie's step was heard in the hall, Meg
fled into the study, and Mrs. March received the culprit alone.
Jo had not told him why he was wanted, fearing he wouldn't come,
but he knew the minute he saw Mrs. March's face, and stood
twirling his hat with a guilty air which convicted him at once.
Jo was dismissed, but chose to march up and down the hall like
a sentinel, having some fear that the prisoner might bolt.  The
sound of voices in the parlor rose and fell for half an hour,
but what happened during that interview the girls never knew.

     When they were called in, Laurie was standing by their
mother with such a penitent face that Jo forgave him on the
spot, but did not think it wise to betray the fact.  Meg received
his humble apology, and was much comforted by the assurance that
Brooke knew nothing of the joke.

     "I'll never tell him to my dying day, wild horses shan't
drag it out of me, so you'll forgive me, Meg, and I'll do any-
thing to show how out-and-out sorry I am," he added, looking
very much ashamed of himself.

     "I'll try,but it was a very ungentlemanly thing to do, I
didn't think you could be so sly and malicious, Laurie," replied
Meg, trying to hid her maidenly confusion under a gravely re-
proachful air.

     "It was altogether abominable, and I don't deserve to be
spoken to for a month, but you will, though, won't you?"  And
Laurie folded his hands together with such and imploring gesture,
as he spoke in his irresistibly persuasive tone, that it was
impossible to frown upon him in spite of his scandalous behavior.

     Meg pardoned him, and Mrs. March's grave face relaxed, in
spite of her efforts to keep sober, when she heard him declare
that he would atone for his sins by all sorts of penances, and
abase himself like a worm before the injured damsel.

     Jo stood aloof, meanwhile, trying to harden her heart
against him, and succeeding only in primming up her face into
an expression of entire disapprobation.  Laurie looked at her
once or twice, but as she showed no sign of relenting, he felt
injured, and turned his back on her till the others were done
with him, when he made her a low bow and walked off without a
word.

     As soon as he had gone, she wished she had been more for-
giving, and when Meg and her mother went upstairs, she felt
lonely and longed for Teddy.  After resisting for some time,
she yielded to the impulse, and armed with a book to return,
went over to the big house.

     "Is Mr. Laurence in?" asked Jo, of a housemaid, who was
coming downstairs.

     "Yes, Miss, but I don't believe he's seeable just yet."

     "Why not?  Is he ill?"

     "La, no Miss, but he's had a scene with Mr. Laurie, who is
in one of his tantrums about something, which vexes the old gen-
tleman, so I dursn't go nigh him."

     "Where is Laurie?'

     "Shut up in his room, and he won't answer, though I've been
a-tapping.  I don't know what's to become of the dinner, for it's
ready, and there's no one to eat it."

     "I'll go and see what the matter is.  I'm not afraid of either
of them."

     Up went Jo, and knocked smartly on the door of Laurie's
little study.

     "Stop that, or I'll open the door and make you!" called out
the young gentleman in a threatening tone.

     Jo immediately knocked again.  The door flew open, and in
she bounced before Laurie could recover from his surprise.  Seeing
that he really was out of temper, Jo, who knew how to manage him,
assumed a contrite expression, and going artistically down upon
her knees, said meekly, "Please forgive me for being so cross.  I
came to make it up, and can't go away till I have."

     "It's all right.  Get up, and don't be a goose, Jo,"  was the
cavalier reply to her petition.

     "Thank you, I will.  Could I ask what's the matter?  You don't
look exactly easy in your mind."

     "I've been shaken, and I won't bear it!" growled Laurie in-
dignantly.

     "Who did it?" demanded Jo.

     "Grandfather.  If it had been anyone else I'd have . . ."
And the injured youth finished his sentence by an energetic ges-
ture of the right arm.

     "That's nothing.  I often shake you, and you don't mind,"
said Jo soothingly.

     "Pooh!  You're a girl, and it's fun, but I'll allow no man
to shake me!"

     "I don't think anyone would care to try it, if you looked
as much like a thundercloud as you do now.  Why were you treated
so?"

     "Just because I wouldn't say what your mother wanted me for.
I'd promised not to tell, and of course I wasn't going to break
my word."

     "Couldn't you satisfy your grandpa in any other way?"

     "No, he would have the truth, the whole truth,and nothing
but the truth.  I'd have told my part of the scrape, if I could
without bringing Meg in.  As I couldn't, I held my tongue, and
bore the scolding till the old gentleman collared me.  Then I
bolted, for fear I should forget myself."

     "It wasn't nice, but he's sorry, I know, so go down and
make up.  I'll help you."

     "Hanged if I do!  I'm not going to be lectured and pum-
melled by everyone, just for a bit of a frolic.  I was sorry
about Meg, and begged pardon like a man, but I won't do it
again, when I wasn't in the wrong."

     "He didn't know that."

     "He ought to trust me, and not act as if I was a baby.  It's
no use, Jo, he's got to learn that I'm able to take care of my-
self, and don't need anyone's apron string to hold on by."

     "What pepper pots you are! " sighed Jo. "How do you mean
to settle this affair?"

     "Well, he ought to beg pardon, and believe me when I say I
can't tell him what the fuss's about."

     "Bless you!  He won't do that."

     "I won't go down till he does."

     "Now, Teddy, be sensible.  Let it pass, and I'll explain
what I can.  You can't stay here, so what's the use of being
melodramatic?"

     "I don't intend to stay here long, anyway.  I'll slip off and
take a journey somewhere, and when Grandpa misses me he'll come
round fast enough."

     "I dare say, but you ought not to go and worry him."

     "Don't preach.  I'll go to Washington and see Brooke.  It's
gay there, and I'll enjoy myself after the troubles."

     "What fun you'd have!  I wish I could run off too," said
Jo, forgetting her part of mentor in lively visions of martial
life at the capital.

     "Come on, then!  Why not?  You go and surprise your father,
and I'll stir up old Brooke.  It would be a glorious joke.  Let's
do it, Jo. We'll leave a letter saying we are all right, and trot
off at once.  I've got money enough.  It will do you good, and no
harm, as you go to your father."

     For a moment Jo looked as if she would agree, for wild as
the plan was, it just suited her.  She was tired of care and
confinement, longed for change, and thoughts of her father
blended temptingly with the novel charms of camps and hospi-
tals, liberty and fun.  Her eyes kindled as they turned wist-
fully toward the window, but they fell on the old house opposite,
and she shook her head with sorrowful decision.

     "If I was a boy, we'd run away together, and have a capital
time, but as I'm a miserable girl, I must be proper and stop at
home.  Don't tempt me, Teddy, it's a crazy plan."

     "That's the fun of it," began Laurie, who had got a willful
fit on him and was possessed to break out of bounds in some way.

     "Hold your tongue!" cried Jo, covering her ears.  "`Prunes
and prisms' are my doom, and I may as well make up my mind to
it. I came here to moralize, not to hear things that make me
skip to think of."

     "I know Meg would wet-blanket such a proposal, but I
thought you had more spirit," began Laurie insinuatingly.

     "Bad boy, be quiet!  Sit down and think of your own sins,
don't go making me add to mine.  If I get your grandpa to
apologize for the shaking, will you give up running away?"
asked Jo seriously.

     "Yes, but you won't do it," answered Laurie, who wished
to make up, but felt that his outraged dignity must be appeas-
ed first.

     "If I can manage the young one, I can the old one," mut-
tered Jo, as she walked away, leaving Laurie bent over a railroad
map with his head propped up on both hands.

     "Come in!" And Mr. Laurence's gruff voice sounded gruffer
than ever, as Jo tapped at his door.

     "It's only me, Sir, come to return a book," she said blandly,
as she entered.

     "Want any more?" asked the old gentleman, looking grim and
vexed, but trying not to show it.

     "Yes, please.  I like old Sam so well, I think I'll try the
second volume," returned Jo, hoping to propitiate him by accept-
ing a second dose of Boswell's JOHNSON, as he had recommended
that lively work.

     The shaggy eyebrows unbent a little as he rolled the steps
toward the shelf where the Johnsonian literature was placed.  Jo
skipped up, and sitting on the top step, affected to be searching
for her book, but was really wondering how best to introduce the
dangerous object of her visit.  Mr. Laurence seemed to suspect
that something was brewing in her mind, for after taking several
brisk turns about the room, he faced round on her, speaking so
abruptly that RASSELAS tumbled face downward on the floor.

     "What has that boy been about?  Don't try to shield him. I
know he has been in mischief by the way he acted when he came
home.  I can't get a word from him, and when I threatened to
shake the truth out of him he bolted upstairs and locked himself
into his room."

     "He did wrong, but we forgave him, and all promised not to
say a word to anyone," began Jo reluctantly.

     "That won't do. He shall not shelter himself behind a prom-
ise from you softhearted girls.  If he's done anything amiss, he
shall confess, beg pardon, and be punished.  Out with it, Jo.  I
won't be kept in the dark."

     Mr. Laurence looked so alarming and spoke so sharply that Jo
would have gladly run away, if she could, but she was perched aloft
on the steps, and he stood at the foot, a lion in the path, so she
had to stay and brave it out.

     "Indeed, Sir, I cannot tell.  Mother forbade it.  Laurie has
confessed, asked pardon, and been punished quite enough.  We don't
keep silence to shield him, but someone else, and it will make
more trouble if you interfere.  Please don't.  It was partly my
fault, but it's all right now. So let's forget it, and talk about
the RAMBLER or something pleasant."

     "Hang the RAMBLER!  Come down and give me your word that
this harum-scarum boy of mine hasn't done anything ungrateful or
impertinent.  If he has, after all your kindness to him, I'll
thrash him with my own hands."

     The threat sounded awful, but did not alarm Jo, for she knew
the irascible old gentleman would never lift a finger against his
grandson, whatever he might say to the contrary.  She obediently
descended, and made as light of the prank as she could without
betraying Meg or forgetting the truth.

     "Hum  . . .  ha . . . well, if the boy held his tongue be-
cause he promised, and not from obstinacy, I'll forgive him. He's
a stubborn fellow and hard to manage," said Mr. Laurence, rubbing
up his hair till it looked as if he had been out in a gale, and
smoothing the frown from his brow with an air of relief.

     "So am I, but a kind word will govern me when all the king's
horses and all the king's men couldn't," said Jo, trying to say
a kind word for her friend, who seemed to get out of one scrape
only to fall into another.

     "You think I'm not kind to him, hey?" was the sharp answer.

     "Oh, dear no, Sir. You are rather too kind sometimes, and
then just a trifle hasty when he tries your patience. Don't you
think you are?"

     Jo was determined to have it out now, and tried to look
quite placid, though she quaked a little after her bold speech.
To her great relief and surprise, the old gentleman only threw
his spectacles onto the table with a rattle and exclaimed frank-
ly . ..

     "You're right, girl, I am!  I love the boy, but he tries my
patience past bearing, and I know how it will end, if we go on so."

     "I'll tell you, he'll run away." Jo was sorry for that speech
the minute it was made.  She meant to warn him that Laurie would
not bear much restraint, and hoped he would be more forebearing
with the lad.

     Mr. Laurence's ruddy face changed suddenly, and he sat down,
with a troubled glance at the picture of a handsome man, which
hung over his table.  It was Laurie's father, who had run away
in his youth, and married against the imperious old man's will.
Jo fancied her remembered and regretted the past, and she wished
she had held her tongue.

     "He won't do it unless he is very much worried, and only
threatens it sometimes, when he gets tired of studying.  I often
think I should like to, especially since my hair was cut, so if
you ever miss us, you may advertise for two boys and look among
the ships bound for India."

     She laughed as she spoke, and Mr. Laurence looked relieved,
evidently taking the whole as a joke.

     "You hussy, how dare you talk in that way?  Where's your
respect for me, and your proper bringing up?  Bless the boys
and girls!  What torments they are, yet we can't do without
them," he said, pinching her cheeks good-humoredly.  "Go and
bring that boy down to his dinner, tell him it's all right, and
advise him not to put on tragedy airs with his grandfather.  I
won't bear it."

     "He won't come, Sir.  He feels badly because you didn't be-
lieve him when he said he couldn't tell.  I think the shaking
hurt his feelings very much."

     Jo tried to look pathetic but must have failed, for Mr.
Laurence began to laugh, and she knew the day was won.

     "I'm sorry for that, and ought to thank him for not shaking
me, I suppose.  What the dickens does the fellow expect?"  And
the old gentleman looked a trifle ashamed of his own testiness.

     "If I were you, I'd write him an apology, Sir.  He says he
won't come down till he has one, and talks about Washington, and
goes on in an absurd way.  A formal apology will make him see
how foolish he is, and bring him down quite amiable.  Try it. He
likes fun, and this was is better than talking.  I'll carry it
up, and teach him his duty."

     Mr. Laurence gave her a sharp look, and put on his specta-
cles, saying slowly, "You're a sly puss, but I don't mind being
managed by you and Beth.  Here, give me a bit of paper, and let
us have done with this nonsense."

     The note was written in the terms which one gentleman would
use to another after offering some deep insult. Jo dropped a kiss
on the top of Mr. Laurence's bald head, and ran up to slip the
apology under Laurie's door, advising him through the keyhole to
be submissive, decorous, and a few other agreeable impossibilities.
Finding the door locked again, she left the note to do its work,
and was going quietly away, when the young gentleman slid down
the banisters, and waited for her at the bottom, saying, with his
most virtuous expression of countenance, "What a good fellow you
are, Jo! Did you get blown up?" he added, laughing.

     "No, he was pretty mild, on the whole."

     "AH!  I got it all round.  Even you cast me off over there,
and I felt just ready to go to the deuce," he began apologetically.

     "Don't talk that way, turn over a new leaf and begin again,
Teddy, my son."

     "I keep turning over new leaves, and spoiling them, as I
used to spoil my copybooks, and I make so many beginnings there
never will be an end," he said dolefully.

     "Go and eat your dinner, you'll feel better after it.  Men
always croak when they are hungry," and Jo whisked out at the
front door after that.

     "That's a `label' on my `sect'," answered Laurie, quoting
Amy, as he went to partake of humble pie dutifully with his
grandfather, who was quite saintly in temper and overwhelmingly
respectful in manner all the rest of the day.

     Everyone thought the matter ended and the little cloud
blown over, but the mischief was done, for though others forgot
it, Meg remembered.  She never alluded to a certain person, but
she thought of him a good deal, dreamed dreams more than ever,
and once Jo, rummaging her sister's desk for stamps, found a
bit of paper scribbled over with the words, `Mrs. John Brooke',
whereat she groaned tragically and cast it into the fire, feeling
that Laurie's prank had hastened the evil day for her.

                         CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

     Like sunshine after a storm were the peaceful weeks which
followed.  The invalids improved rapidly, and Mr. March began
to talk or returning early in the new year.  Beth was soon able
to lie on the study sofa all day, amusing herself with the well-
beloved cats at first, and in time with doll's sewing, which had
fallen sadly behindhand.  Her once active limbs were so stiff
and feeble that Jo took her for a daily airing about the house
in her strong arms.  Meg cheerfully blackened and burned her
white hands cooking delicate messes for `the dear', while Amy,
a loyal slave of the ring, celebrated her return by giving
away as many of her treasures as she could prevail on her sisters
to accept.

     As Christmas approached, the usual mysteries began to haunt
the house, and Jo frequently convulsed the family by proposing
utterly impossible or magnificently absurd ceremonies, in honor
of this unusually merry Christmas.  Laurie was equally impract-
icable, and would have had bonfires, skyrockets, and triumphal
arches, if he had had his own way.  After many skirmishes and
snubbings, the ambitious pair were considered effectually quenched
and went about with forlorn faces, which were rather belied by
explosions of laughter when the two got together.

     Several days of unusually mild weather fitly ushered in a
splendid Christmas Day.  Hannah `felt in her bones' that it was
going to be an unusually fine day, and she proved herself a
true prophetess, for everybody and everything seemed bound to
produce a grand success.  To begin with, Mr. March wrote that
he should soon be with them, then Beth felt uncommonly well
that morning, and, being dressed in her mother's gift, a soft
crimson merino wrapper, was borne in high triumph to the window
to behold the offering of Jo and Laurie.  The Unquenchables had
done their best to be worthy of the name, for like elves they
had worked by night and conjured up a comical surprise.  Out in
the garden stood a stately snow maiden, crowned with holly,
bearing a basket of fruit and flowers in one hand, a great roll
of music in the other, a perfect rainbow of an Afghan round her
chilly shoulders, and a Christmas carol issuing from her lips
on a pink paper streamer.

                   THE JUNGFRAU TO BETH

              God bless you, dear Queen Bess!
                May nothing you dismay,
              But health and peace and happiness
                Be yours, this Christmas day.

              Here's fruit to feed our busy bee,
                And flowers for her nose.
              Here's music for her pianee,
                An afghan for her toes,

              A portrait of Joanna, see,
                By Raphael No. 2,
              Who laboured with great industry
                To make it fair and true.

              Accept a ribbon red, I beg,
                For Madam Purrer's tail,
              And ice cream made by lovely Peg,
                A Mont Blanc in a pail.

              Their dearest love my makers laid
                Within my breast of snow.
              Accept it, and the Alpine maid,
                From Laurie and from Jo.

     How Beth laughed when she saw it, how Laurie ran up and
down to bring in the gifts, and what ridiculous speeches Jo
made as she presented them.

     "I'm so full of happiness, that if Father was only here, I
couldn't hold one drop more," said Beth, quite sighing with con-
tentment as Jo carried her off to the study to rest after the
excitement, and to refresh herself with some of the delicious
grapes the `Jungfrau' had sent her.

     "So am I," added Jo, slapping the pocket wherein reposed
the long-desired UNDINE AND SINTRAM.

     "I'm sure I am," echoed Amy, poring over the engraved copy
of the Madonna and Child, which her mother had given her in a
pretty frame.

     "Of course I am!" cried Meg, smoothing the silvery folds of
her first sild dress, for Mr. Laurence had insisted on giving it.

     "How can I be otherwise?" said Mrs. March gratefully, as her
eyes went from her husband's letter to Beth's smiling face, and
her hand carressed the brooch made of gray and golden, chestnut
and dark brown hair, which the girls had just fastened on her
breast.

     Now and then, in this workaday world, things do happen in
the delightful storybook fashion, and what a comfort it is.  Half
an hour after everyone had said they were so happy they could
only hold one drop more, the drop came.  Laurie opened the parlor
door and popped his head in very quietly.  He might just as well
have turned a somersault and uttered an Indian war whoop, for his
face was so full of suppressed excitement and his voice so treach-
erously joyful that everyone jumped up, though he only said, in a
queer, breathless voice, "Here's another Christmas present for the
March family."

     Before the words were well out of his mouth, he was whisked
away somehow, and in his place appeared a tall man, muffled up to
the eyes, leaning on the arm of another tall man, who tried to say
something and couldn't.  Of course there was a general stampede,
and for several minutes everybody seemed to lose their wits, for
the strangest things were done, and no one said a word.

     Mr. March became invisible in the embrace of four pairs of
loving arms.  Jo disgraced herself by nearly fainting away, and
had to be doctored by Laurie in the china closet.  Mr. Brooke
kissed Meg entirely by mistake, as he somewhat incoherently ex-
plained.  And Amy, the dignified, tumbled over a stool, and never
stopping to get up, hugged and cried over her father's boots in
the most touching manner.  Mrs. March was the first to recover
herself, and held up her hand with a warning, "Hush!  Remember
Beth."

     But it was too late.  The study door flew open, the little
red wrapper appeared on the threshold, joy put strength into the
feeble limbs, and Beth ran straight into her father's arms. Never
mind what happened just after that, for the full hearts overflowed,
washing away the bitterness of the past and leaving only the sweet-
ness of the present.

     It was not at all romantic, but a hearty laugh set everybody
straight again, for Hannah was discovered behind the door, sobbing
over the fat turkey, which she had forgotten to put down when she
rushed up from the kitchen. As the laugh subsided, Mrs. March began
to thank Mr. Brooke for his faithful care of her husband, at which
Mr. Brooke suddenly remembered that Mr. March needed rest, and
seizing Laurie, he precipitately retired.  Then the two invalids
were ordered to repose, which they did, by both sitting in one
big chair and talking hard.

     Mr. March told how he had longed to surprise them, and how,
when the fine weather came, he had been allowed by his doctor, to
take advantage of it, how devoted Brooke had been, and how he was
altogether a most estimable and upright young man.  Why Mr. March
paused a minute just there, and after a glance at Meg, who was
violently poking the fire, looked at his wife with an inquiring
lift of the eyebrows, I leave you to imagine.  Also why Mrs.
March gently nodded her head and asked, rather abruptly, if he
wouldn't like to have something to eat.  Jo saw and understood
the look, and she stalked grimly away to get wine and beef tea,
muttering to herself as she slammed the door, "I hate estimable
young men with brown eyes!"

     There never was such a Christmas dinner as they had that day.
The fat turkey was a sight to behold, when Hannah sent him up,
stuffed, browned, and decorated.  So was the plum pudding, which
melted in one's mouth, likewise the jellies, in which Amy reveled
like a fly in a honeypot.  Everything turned out well, which was
a mercy, Hannah said, "For my mind was that flustered, Mum, that
it's a merrycle I didn't roast the pudding, and stuff the turkey
with raisins, let alone bilin' of it in a cloth."

     Mr. Laurence and his grandson dined with them, also Mr.
Brooke, at whom Jo glowered darkly, to Laurie's infinite amusement.
Two easy chairs stood side by side at the head of the table, in
which sat Beth and her father, feasting modestly on chicken and a
little fruit.  They drank healths, told stories, sang songs,
`reminisced', as the old folks say, and had a thoroughly good time.
A sleigh ride had been planned, but the girls would not leave their
father, so the guests departed early, and as twilight gathered, the
happy family sat together round the fire.

     "Just a year ago we were groaning over the dismal Christmas we
expected to have.  Do you remember?" asked Jo, breaking a short
pause which had followed a long conversation about many things.

     "Rather a pleasant year on the whole!" said Meg, smiling at
the fire, and congratulating herself on having treated Mr. Brooke
with dignity.

     "I think it's been a pretty hard one," observed Amy, watching
the light shine on her ring with thoughtful eyes.

     "i'm glad it's over, because we've got you back," whispered
Beth, who sat on her father's knee.

     "Rather a rough road for you to travel, my little pilgrims,
especially the latter part of it.  But you have got on bravely,
and I think the burdens are in a fair way to tumble off very soon,"
said Mr. March, looking with fatherly satisfaction at the four
young faces gathered round him.

     "How do you know?  Did Mother tell you?' asked Jo.

     "Not much.  Straws show which way the wind blows, and I've
made several discoveries today."

     "Oh, tell us what they are!" cried Meg, who sat beside him.

     "Here is one." And taking up the hand which lay on the arm
of his chair, he pointed to the roughened forefinger, a burn on
the back, and two or three little hard spots on the palm.  "I
remember a time when this hand was white and smooth, and your
first care was to keep it so.  It was very pretty then, but to
me it is much prettier now, for in this seeming blemishes I read
a little history.  A burnt offering has been made to vanity, this
hardened palm has earned something better than blisters, and I'm
sure the sewing done by these pricked fingers will last a long
time, so much good will went into the stitches.  Meg, my dear,
I value the womanly skill which keeps home happy more than white
hands or fashionable accomplishments.  I'm proud to shake this
good, industrious little hand, and hope I shall not soon be
asked to give it away."

     If Meg had wanted a reward for hours of patient labor, she
received it in the hearty pressure of her father's hand and the
approving smile he gave her.

     "What about Jo?  Please say something nice, for she has tried
so hard and been so very, very good to me," said Beth in her father's
ear.

     He laughed and looked across at the tall girl who sat opposite,
with and unusually mild expression in her face.

     "In spite of the curly crop, I don't see the `son Jo' whom I
left a year ago," said Mr. March.  "I see a young lady who pins
her collar straight, laces her boots neatly, and neither whistles,
talks slang,  nor lies on the rug as she used to do.  Her face is
rather thin and pale just now, with watching and anxiety, but I
like to look at it, for it has grown gentler, and her voice is
lower.  She doesn't bounce, but moves quietly, and takes care of
a certain little person in a motherly way which delights me.  I
rather miss my wild girl, but if I get a strong, helpful, tender-
hearted woman in her place, I shall feel quite satisfied.  I don't
know whether the shearing sobered our black sheep, but I do know
that in all Washington I couldn't find anything beautiful enough
to be bought with the five-and-twenty dollars my good girl sent me."

     Jo's keen eyes were rather dim for a minute, and her thin
face grew rosy in the firelight as she received her father's praise,
feeling that she did deserve a portion of it.

     "Now, Beth," said Amy, longing for her turn, but ready to wait.

     "There's so little of her, I'm afraid to say much, for fear
she will slip away altogether, though she is not so shy as she used
to be," began their father cheerfully.  But recollecting how nearly
he had lost her, he held her close, saying tenderly, with her cheek
against his own, "I've got you safe, my Beth, and I'll keep you so,
please God."

     After a minute's silence, he looked down at Amy, who sat on
the cricket at his feet, and said, with a caress of the shining
hair . . .

     "I observed that Amy took drumsticks at dinner, ran errands
for her mother all the afternoon, gave Meg her place tonight, and
has waited on every on with patience and good humor.  I also ob-
serve that she does not fret much nor look in the glass, and has
not even mentioned a very pretty ring which she wears, so I con-
clude that she has learned to think of other people more and of
herself less, and has decided to try and mold her character as
carefully as she molds her little clay figures.  I am glad of
this, for though I should be very proud of a graceful statue made
by her, I shall be infinitely prouder of a lovable daughter with
a talent for making life beautiful to herself and others."

     "What are you thinking of, Beth?" asked Jo, when Amy had
thanked her father and told about her ring.

     "I read in PILGRIM'S PROGRESS today how, after many troubles,
christian and Hopeful came to a pleasant green meadow where lilies
bloomed all year round, and there they rested happily, as we do
now, before they went on to their journey's end," answered Beth,
adding, as she slipped out of her father's arms and went to the
instrument, "It's singing time now, and I want to be in my old
place.  I'll try to sing the song of the shepherd boy which the
Pilgrims heard.  I made the music for Father, because he likes
the verses."

     So, sitting at the dear little piano, Beth softly touched the
keys, and in the sweet voice they had never thought to hear again,
sang to her own accompaniment the quaint hymn, which was a sing-
ularly fitting song for her.

              He that is down need fear no fall,
                He that is low no pride.
              He that is humble ever shall
                Have God to be his guide.

              I am content with what I have,
                Little be it, or much.
              And, Lord!  Contentment still I crave,
                Because Thou savest such.

              Fulness to them a burden is,
                That go on pilgrimage.
              Here little, and hereafter bliss,
                Is best from age to age!

                        CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

     Like bees swarming after their queen, mother and daughters
hovered about Mr. March the next day, neglecting everything to
look at, wait upon, and listen to the new invalid, who was in a
fair way to be killed by kindness.  As he sat propped up in a
big chair by Beth's sofa, with the other three close by, and
Hannah popping in her head now and then `to peek at the dear
man', nothing seemed needed to complete their happiness.  But
something was needed, and the elder ones felt it, though none
confessed the fact.  Mr. and Mrs. March looked at one another
with an anxious expression, as their eyes followed Meg.  Jo
had sudden fits of sobriety, and was seen to shake her fist at
Mr. Brooke's umbrella, which had been left in the hall.  Meg
was absent-minded, shy, and silent, started when the bell rang,
and colored when John's name was mentioned.  Amy said, "Every-
one seemed waiting for something, and couldn't settle down,
which was queer, since Father was safe at home," and Beth
innocently wondered why their neighbors didn't run over as
usual.

     Laurie went by in the afternoon, and seeing Meg at the
window, seemed suddenly possessed with a melodramatic fit, for
he fell down on one knee in the snow, beat his breast, tore his
hair, and clasped his hands imploringly, as if begging some boon.
And when Meg told him to behave himself and go away, he wrung
imaginary tears out of his handkerchief, and staggered round the
corner as if in utter despair.

     "What does the goose mean?" said Meg, laughing and trying to
look unconscious.

     "He's showing you how your John will go on by-and-by. Touch-
in, isn't it?" answered Jo scornfully.

     "Don't say my John, it isn't proper or true," but Meg's voice
lingered over the words as if they sounded pleasant to her. "Please
don't plague me, Jo, I've told you I don't care much about him, and
there isn't to be anything said, but we are all to be friendly, and
go on as before."

     "We can't, for something has been said, and Laurie's mischief
has spoiled you for me.  I see it, and so does Mother.  You are not
like your old self a bit, and seem ever so far away from me.  I
don't mean to plague you and will bear it like a man, but I do wish
it was all settled.  I hate to wait, so if you mean ever to do it,
make haste and have it over quickly," said Jo pettishly.

     "I can't say anything till he speaks, and he won't, because
Father said I was too young," began Meg, bending over her work
with a queer little smile, which suggested that she did not quite
agree with her father on that point.

     "If he did speak, you wouldn't know what to say, but would
cry or blush, or let him have his own way, instead of giving a
good, decided no."

     "I'm not so silly and weak as you think.  I know just what
I should say, for I've planned it all, so I needn't be taken
unawares.  There's no knowing what may happen, and I wished to
be prepared."

     Jo couldn't help smiling at the important air which Meg had
unconsciously assumed and which was as becoming as the pretty
color varying in her cheeks.

     "Would you mind telling me what you'd say?" asked Jo more
respectfully.

     "Not at all.  You are sixteen now, quite old enough to be
my confidente, and my experience will be useful to you by-and-by,
perhaps, in your own affairs of this sort."

     "Don't mean to have any.  It's fun to watch other people
philander, but I should feel like a fool doing it myself," said
Jo, looking alarmed at the thought.

     "I think not, if you liked anyone very much, and he liked
you."  Meg spoke as if to herself, and glanced out at the lane
where she had often seen lovers walking together in the summer
twilight.

     "I thought you were going to tell your speech to that man,"
said Jo, rudely shortening her sister's little reverie.

     "Oh, I should merely say, quite calmly and decidedly, `Thank
you, Mr. Brooke, you are very kind, but I agree with Father that
I am too young to enter into any engagement at present, so please
say no more, but let us be friends as we were."

     "Hum, that's stiff and cool enough!  I don't believe you'll
ever say it, and I know he won't be satisfied if you do.  If he
goes on like the rejected lovers in books, you'll give in, rather
than hurt his feelings."

     "No, I won't.  I shall tell him I've made up my mind, and
shall walk out of the room with dignity."

     Meg rose as she spoke, and was just going to rehearse the
dignified exit, when a step in the hall made her fly into her
seat and begin to sew as fast as if her life depended on finish-
ing that particular seam in a given time.  Jo smothered a laugh
at the sudden change, and when someone gave a modest tap, opened
the door with a grim aspect which was anything but hospitable.

     "Good afternoon.  I came to get my umbrella, that is, to see
how your father finds himself today," said Mr. Brooke, getting a
trifle confused as his eyes went from one telltale face to the
other.

     "It's very well, he's in the rack.  I'll get him, and tell it
you are here."  And having jumbled her father and the umbrella well
together in her reply, Jo slipped out of the room to give Meg a
chance to make her speech and air her dignity.  But the instant she
vanished, Meg began to sidle toward the door, murmuring . . .

     "Mother will like to see you.  Pray sit down, I'll call her."

     "Don't go.  Are you afraid of me, Margaret?"  And Mr. Brooke
looked so hurt that Meg thought she must have done something very
rude.  She blushed up to the little curls on her forehead, for he
had never called her Margaret before, and she was surprised to
find how natural and sweet it seemed to hear him say it.  Anxious
to appear friendly and at her ease, she put out her hand with a
confiding gesture, and said gratefully . . .

     "How can I be afraid when you have been so kind to Father?
I only wish I could thank you for it."

     "Shall I tell you how?" asked Mr. Brooke, holding the small
hand fast in both his own, and looking down at Meg with so much
love in the brown eyes that her heart began to flutter, and she
both longed to run away and to stop and listen.

     "Oh no, please don't, I'd rather not," she said, trying to
withdraw her hand, and looking frightened in spite of her denial.

     "I won't trouble you.  I only want to know if you care for
me a little, Meg.  I love you so much, dear,"  added Mr. Brooke
tenderly.

     This was the moment for the calm, proper speech, but Meg
didn't make it.  She forgot every word of it, hung her head, and
answered, "I don't know," so softly that John had to stoop down
to catch the foolish little reply.

     He seemed to think it was worth the trouble, for he smiled
to himself as if quite satisfied, pressed the plump hand grate-
fully, and said in his most persuasive tone, "Will you try and
find out?  I want to know so much, for I can't go to work with
any heart until I learn whether I am to have my reward in the end
or not."

     "I'm too young," faltered Meg, wondering was she was so
fluttered, yet rather enjoying it.

     "I'll wait, and in the meantime, you could be learning to
like me.  Would it be a very hard lesson, dear?"

     "Not if I chose to learn it, but . . ."

     "Please choose to learn, Meg.  I love you to teach, and this
is easier than German," broke in John, getting possession of the
other hand, so that she had no way of hiding her face as he bent
to look into it.

     His tone was properly beseeching, but stealing a shy look
at him, Meg saw that his eyes were merry as well as tender, and
that he wore the satisfied smile of one who had no doubt of his
success.  This nettled her.  Annie Moffat's foolish lessons in
coquetry came into her mind, and the love of power, which sleeps
in the bosoms of the best of little women, woke up all of a
sudden and took possession of her.  She felt excited and
strange, and not knowing what else to do, followed a capri-
cious impulse, and, withdrawing her hands, said petulantly,
"I don't choose.  Please go away and let me be!"

     Poor Mr. Brooke looked as if his lovely castle in the air
was tumbling about his ears, for he had never seen Meg in such
a mood before, and it rather bewildered him.

     "Do you really mean that?" he asked anxiously, following
her as she walked away.

     "Yes, I do.  I don't want to be worried about such things.
Father says I needn't, it's too soon and I'd rather not."

     "Mayn't I hope you'll change your mind by-and-by?  I'll
wait and say nothing till you have had more time.  Don't play
with me, Meg.  I didn't think that of you."

     "Don't think of me at all.  I'd rather you wouldn't," said
Meg, taking a naughty satisfaction in trying her lover's patience
and her own power.

     He was grave and pale now, and looked decidedly more like
the novel heroes whom she admired, but he neither slapped his
forehead nor tramped about the room as they did.  He just stood
looking at her so wistfully, so tenderly, that she found her
heart relenting in spite of herself.  What would have happened
next I cannot say, if Aunt March had not come hobbling in at
this interesting minute.

     The old lady couldn't resist her longing to see her nephew,
for she had met Laurie as she took her airing, and hearing of
Mr. March's arrival, drove straight out to see him.  The family
were all busy in the back part of the house, and she had made
her way quietly in, hoping to surprise them.  She did surprise
two of them so much that Meg started as if she had seen a
ghost, and Mr. Brooke vanished into the study.

     "Bless me, what's all this?" cried the old lady with a rap
of her cane as she glanced from the pale young gentleman to the
scarlet young lady.

     "It's Father's friend.  I'm so surprised to see you!" stam-
mered Meg, feeling that she was in for a lecture now.

     "That's evident," returned Aunt March, sitting down.  "But
what is Father's friend saying to make you look like a peony?
There's mischief going on, and I insist upon knowing what it
is," with another rap.

     "We were only talking.  Mr. Brooke came for his umbrella,"
began Meg, wishing that Mr. Brooke and the umbrella were safely
out of the house.

     "Brooke?  That boy's tutor?  Ah! I understand now.  I know
all about it. Jo blundered into a wrong message in one of your
Father's letters, and I made her tell me. You haven't gone and
accepted him, child?" cried Aunt March, looking scandalized.

     "Hush! He'll hear.  Shan't I call Mother?" said Meg, much
troubled.

     "Not yet.  I've something to say to you, and I must free my
mind at once.  Tell me, do you mean to marry this Cook?  If you
do, not one penny of my money ever goes to you.  Remember that,
and be a sensible girl," said the old lady impressively.

     Now Aunt March possessed in perfection the art of rousing
the spirit of opposition in the gentlest people, and enjoyed
doing it.  The best of us have a spice of perversity in us,
especially when we are young and in love.  If Aunt March had
begged Meg to accept John Brooke, she would probably have
declared she couldn't think of it, but as she was preemptorily
ordered not to like him, she immediately made up her mind that
she would.  Inclination as well as perversity made the decision
easy, and being already much excited, Meg opposed the old lady
with unusual spirit.

     "I shall marry whom I please, Aunt March, and you can
leave your money to anyone you like," she said, nodding her
head with a resolute air.

     "Highty-tighty!  Is that the way you take my advice, Miss?
You'll be sorry for it by-and-by, when you've tried love in a
cottage and found it a failure."

     "It can't be a worse one than some people find in big
houses," retorted Meg.

     Aunt March put on her glasses and took a look at the girl,
for she did not know her in this new mood.  Meg hardly knew
herself, she felt so brave and independent, so glad to defend
John and assert her right to love him, if she liked. Aunt March
saw that she had begun wrong, and after a little pause, made a
fresh start, saying as mildly as she could, "Now, Meg, my dear,
be reasonable and take my advice. I mean it kindly, and don't
want you to spoil your whole life by making a mistake at the
beginning. You ought to marry well and help your family.  It's
your duty to make a rich match and it ought to be impressed
upon you."

     "Father and Mother don't think so.  They like John though
he is poor."

     "Your parents, my dear, have no more worldly wisdom than a
pair of babies."

     "I'm glad of it," cried Meg stoutly.

     Aunt March took no notice, but went on with her lecture.
"This Rook is poor and hasn't got any rich relations, has he?"

     "No, but he has many warm friends."

     "You can't live on friends, try it and see how cool they'll
grow.  He hasn't any business, has he?"

     "Not yet.  Mr. Laurence is going to help him."

     "That won't last long.  James Laurence is a crotchety old
fellow and not to be depended on.  So you intend to marry a man
without money, position, or business, and go on working harder
than you do now, when you might be comfortable all your days
by minding me and doing better?  I thought you had more sense,
Meg."

     "I couldn't do better if I waited half my life!  John is
good and wise, he's got heaps of talent, he's willing to work
and sure to get on, he's so energetic and brave.  Everyone likes
and respects him, and I'm proud to think he cares for me, though
I'm so poor and young and silly," said Meg, looking prettier than
ever in her earnestness.

     "He knows you have got rich relations, child.  That's the
secret of his liking, I suspect."

     "Aunt March, how dare you say such a thing?  John is above
such meanness, and I won't listen to you a minute if you talk so,"
cried Meg indignantly, forgetting everything but the injustice of
the old lady's suspicions.  "My John wouldn't marry for money, any
more than I would.  We are willing to work and we mean to wait. I'm
not afraid of being poor, for I've been happy so far, and I know I
shall be with him because he loves me, and I . . ."

     Meg stopped there, remembering all of a sudden that she hadn't
made up her mind, that she had told `her John' to go away, and that
he might be overhearing her inconsistent remarks.

     Aunt March was very angry, for she had set her heart on having
her pretty niece make a fine match, and something in the girl's
happy young face made the lonely old woman feel both sad and sour.

     "Well, I wash my hands of the whole affair!  You are a willful
child, and you've lost more than you know by this piece of folly.
No, I won't stop.  I'm disappointed in you, and haven't spirits to
see your father now.  Don't expect anything from me when you are
married.  Your Mr. Book's friends must take care of you.  I'm done
with you forever."

     And slamming the door in Meg's face, Aunt March drove off in
high dudgeon.  She seemed to take all the girl's courage with her,
for when left alone, Meg stood for a moment, undecided whether to
laugh or cry.  Before she could make up her mind, she was taken
possession of by Mr. Brooke, who said all in one breath, "I couldn't
help hearing, Meg. Thank you for defending me, and Aunt March for
proving that you do care for me a little bit."

     "I didn't know how much till she abused you," began Meg.

     "And I needn't go away, but my stay and be happy, may I, dear?"

     Here was another fine chance to make the crushing speech and
the stately exit, but Meg never thought of doing either, and dis-
graced herself forever in Jo's eyes by meekly whispering, "Yes,
John," and hiding her face on Mr. Brooke's waistcoat.

     Fifteen minutes after Aunt March's departure, Jo came softly
downstairs, paused an instant at the parlor door, and hearing no
sound within, nodded and smiled with a satisfied expression, saying
to herself, "She has seen him away as we planned, and that affair
is settled.  I'll go and hear the fun, and have a good laugh over
it."

     But poor Jo never got her laugh, for she was transfixed upon
the threshold by a spectacle which held her there, staring with
her mouth nearly as wide open as her eyes.  Going in to exult over
a fallen enemy and to praise a strong-minded sister for the banish-
ment of an objectionable lover, it certainly was a shock to behold
the aforesaid enemy serenely sitting on the sofa, with the strong-
minded sister enthroned upon his knee and wearing an expression of
the most abject submission.  Jo gave a sort of gasp, as if a cold
shower bath had suddenly fallen upon her, for such an unexpected
turning of the tables actually took her breath away.  At the odd
sound the lovers turned and saw her.  Meg jumped up, looking both
proud and shy, but `that man', as Jo called him, actually laughed
and said coolly, as he kissed the astonished newcomer, "Sister Jo,
congratulate us!"

     That was adding insult to injury, it was altogether too much,
and making some wild demonstration with her hands, Jo vanished
without a word.  Rushing upstairs, she startled the invalids by
exclaiming tragically as she burst into the room, "Oh, do somebody
go down quick!  John Brooke is acting dreadfully, and Meg likes it!"

     Mr. and Mrs. March left the room with speed, and casting herself
upon the be, Jo cried and scolded tempestuously as she told the awful
news to Beth and Amy.  The little girls, however, considered it a
most agreeable and interesting event, and Jo got little comfort from
them, so she went up to her refuge in the garret, and confided her
troubles to the rats.

     Nobody ever knew what went on in the parlor that afternoon, but
a great deal of talking was done, and quiet Mr. Brooke astonished his
friends by the eloquence and spirit with which he pleaded his suit,
told his plans, and persuaded them to arrange everything just as he
wanted it.

     The tea bell rang before he had finished describing the paradise
which he meant to earn for Meg, and he proudly took her in to supper,
both looking so happy that Jo hadn't the heart to be jealous or dismal.
Amy was very much impressed by John's devotion and Meg's dignity, Beth
beamed at them from a distance, while Mr. and Mrs. March surveyed the
young couple with such tender satisfaction that it was perfectly
evident Aunt March was right in calling them as `unworldly as a pair
of babies'.  No one ate much, but everyone looked very happy, and the
old room seemed to brighten up amazingly when the first romance of
the family began there.

     "You can't say nothing pleasant ever happens now, can you, Meg?"
said Amy, trying to decide how she would group the lovers in a sketch
she was planning to make.

     "No, I'm sure I can't.  How much has happened since I said that!
It seems a year ago," answered Meg, who was in a blissful dream
lifted far above such common things as bread and butter.

     "The joys come close upon the sorrows this time, and I rather
think the changes have begun," said Mrs. March.  "In most families
there comes, now and then, a year full of events. This has been such
a one, but it ends well, after all."

     "Hope the next will end better," muttered Jo, who found it very
hard to see Meg absorbed in a stranger before her face, for Jo loved
a few persons very dearly and dreaded to have their affection lost
or lessened in any way.

     "I hope the third year from this will end better.  I mean it
shall, if I live to work out my plans," said Mr. Brooke, smiling at
Meg, as if everything had become possible to him now.

     "Doesn't  it seem very long to wait?" asked Amy, who was in a
hurry for the wedding.

     "I've got so much to learn before I shall be ready, it seems
a short time to me," answered Meg, with a sweet gravity in her face
never seen there before.

     "You have only to wait, I am to do the work," said John begin-
ning his labors by picking up Meg's napkin, with an expression which
caused Jo to shake her head, and then say to herself with an air of
relief as the front door banged, "Here comes Laurie.  Now we shall
have some sensible conversation."

     But Jo was mistaken, for Laurie came prancing in, overflowing
with good spirits, bearing a great bridal-looking bouquet for `Mrs.
John Brooke', and evidently laboring under the delusion that the
whole affair had been brought about by his excellent management.

     "I knew Brooke would have it all his own way, he always does,
for when he makes up his mind to accomplish anything, it's done
though the sky falls," said Laurie, when he had presented his
offering and his congratulations.

     "Much obliged for that recommendation. I take it as a good
omen for the future and invite you to my wedding on the spot,"
answered Mr. Brooke, who felt at peace with all mankind, even his
mischievous pupil.

     "I'll come if I'm at the ens of the earth, for the sight of
Jo's face alone on that occasion would be worth a long journey.
You don't look festive, ma'am, what's the matter?" asked Laurie,
following her into a corner of the parlor, whither all had adjourned
to greet Mr. Laurence.

     "I don't approve of the match, but I've made up my mind to bear
it, and shall not say a word against it," said Jo solemnly.  "You
can't know how hard it is for me to give up Meg," she continued
with a little quiver in her voice.

     "You don't give her up.  You only go halves," said Laurie
consolingly.

     "It can never be the same again.  I've lost my dearest friend,"
sighed Jo.

     "You've got me, anyhow.  I'm not good for much, I know, but
I'll stand by you, Jo, all the days of my life.  Upon my word I will!"
And Laurie meant what he said.

     "I know you will, and I'm ever so much obliged.  You are always
a great comfort to me, Teddy," returned Jo, gratefully shaking hands.

     "Well, now, don't be dismal, there's a good fellow.  It's all
right you see.  Meg is happy, Brooke will fly round and get settled
immediately, Grandpa will attend to him, and it will be very jolly
to see Meg in her own little house.  We'll have capital times after
she is gone, for I shall be through college before long, and then
we'll go abroad on some nice trip or other.  Wouldn't that console you?"

     "I rather think it would, but there's no knowing what may happen
in three years," said Jo thoughtfully.

     "That's true.  Don't you wish you could take a look forward and
wee where we shall all be then?  I do," returned Laurie.

     "I think not, for I might see something sad, and everyone looks
so happy now, I don't believe they could be much improved." And Jo's
eyes went slowly round the room, brightening as they looked, for the
prospect was a pleasant one.

     Father and Mother sat together, quietly reliving the first
chapter of the romance which for them began some twenty years ago.
Amy was drawing the lovers,who sat apart in a beautiful world of
their own, the light of which touched their faces with a grace the
little artist could not copy.  Beth lay on her sofa, talking cheerily
with her old friend, who held her little hand as if he felt that it
possessed the power to lead him along the peaceful way she walked.
Jo lounged in her favorite low seat, with the grave quiet look which
best became her, and Laurie, leaning on the back of her chair, his
chin on a level with her curly head, smiled with his friendliest
aspect, and nodded at her in the long glass which reflected them
both.

     So the curtain falls upon Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy.  Whether it
ever rises again, depends upon the reception give the first act of
the domestic drama called  LITTLE WOMEN.

                         LITTLE WOMEN PART 2

                         CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

     In order that we may start afresh and go to Meg's wedding
with free minds, it will be well to begin with a little gossip
about the Marches.  And here let me premise that if any of the
elders think there is too much `lovering' in the story, as I fear
they may (I'm not afraid the young folks will make that objection),
I can only say with Mrs. March, "What can you expect when I have
four gay girls in the house, and a dashing young neighbor over the
way?"

     The three years that have passed have brought but few changes
to the quiet family.  The war is over, and Mr. March safely at
home,busy with his books and the small parish which found in him
a minister by nature as by grace, a quiet, studious man, rich in
the wisdom that is better than learning, the charity which calls
all mankind `brother', the piety that blossoms into character,
making it august and lovely.

     These attributes, in spite of poverty and the strict integrity
which shut him out from the more worldly successes, attracted to
him many admirable persons, as naturally as sweet herbs draw bees,
and as naturally he gave them the honey into which fifty years of
hard experience had distilled no bitter drop.  Earnest young men
found the gray-headed scholar as young at heart as they, thoughtful
or troubled women instinctively brought their doubts to him, sure
of finding the gentlest sympathy, the wisest counsel.  Sinners told
their sins to the pure-hearted old man and were both rebuked and
saved.  Gifted men found a companion in him.  Ambitious men caught
glimpses of nobler ambitions than their own, and even worldlings
confessed that his beliefs were beautiful and true, although `they
wouldn't pay'.

     To outsiders the five energetic women seemed to rule the house,
and so they did in many things, but the quiet scholar, sitting among
his books, was still the head of the family, the household conscience,
anchor, and comforter, for to him the busy, anxious women always
turned in troublous times, finding him, in the truest sense of those
sacred words, husband and father.

     The girls gave their hearts into their mother's keeping, their
souls into their father's, and to both parents, who lived and labored
so faithfully for them, they gave a love that grew with their growth
and bound them tenderly together by the sweetest tie which blesses
life and outlives death.

     Mrs. March is as brisk and cheery, though rather grayer, than
when we saw her last, and just now so absorbed in Meg's affairs that
the hospitals and homes still full of wounded `boys' and soldiers'
widows, decidedly miss the motherly missionary's visits.

     John Brooke did his duty manfully for a year, got wounded, was
sent home, and not allowed to return.  He received no stars or bars,
but he deserved them, for he cheerfully risked all he had, and life
and love are very precious when both are in full bloom.  Perfectly
resigned to his discharge, he devoted himself to getting well, pre-
paring for business, and earning a home for Meg.  With the good
sense and sturdy independence that characterized him, he refused
Mr. Laurence's more generous offers, and accepted the place of book-
keeper, feeling better satisfied to begin with an honestly earned
salary than by running any risks with borrowed money.

     Meg had spent the time in working as well as waiting, growing
womanly in character, wise in housewifely arts, and prettier than
ever, for love is a great beautifier.  She had her girlish ambitions
and hopes, and felt some disappointment at the humble way in which
the new life must begin.  Ned Moffat had just married Sallie Gardi-
ner, and Meg couldn't help contrasting their fine house and carriage,
many gifts, and splendid outfit with her own, and secretly wishing
she could have the same.  But somehow envy and discontent soon van-
ished when she thought of all the patient love and labor John had
put into the little home awaiting her, and when they sat together in
the twilight, talking over their small plans, the future always grew
so beautiful and bright that she forgot Sallie's splendor and felt
herself the richest, happiest girl in Christendom.

     Jo never went back to Aunt March, for the old lady took such
a fancy to AMy that she bribed her with the offer of drawing lessons
from one of the best teachers going, and for the sake of this advan-
tage, Amy would have served a far harder mistress.  So she gave her
mornings to duty, her afternoons to pleasure, and prospered finely.
Jo meantime devoted herself to literature and Beth, who remained
delicate long after the fever was a thing of the past.  Not an in-
valid exactly, but never again the rosy, healthy creature she had
been, yet always hopeful, happy, and serene, and busy with the quiet
duties she loved, everyone's friend, and an angel in the house, long
before those who loved her most had learned to know it.

     As long as THE SPREAD EAGLE paid her a dollar a column for her
`rubbish', as she called it, Jo felt herself a woman of means, and
spun her little romances diligently.  But great plans fermented in
her busy brain and ambitious mind, and the old tin kitchen in the
garret held a slowly increasing pile of blotted manuscript, which
was one day to place the name of March upon the roll of fame.

     Laurie, having dutifully gone to college to please his grand-
father, was now getting through it in the easiest possible manner
to please himself.  A universal favorite, thanks to money, manners,
much talent, and the kindest heart that ever got its owner into
scrapes by trying to get other people out of them, he stood in
great danger of being spoiled, and probably would have been, like
many another promising boy, if he had not possessed a talisman
against evil in the memory of the kind old man who was bound up in
his success, the motherly friend who watched over him as if he were
her son, and last, but not least by any means, the knowledge that
four innocent girls loved, admired, and believed in him with all
their hearts.

     Being only `a glorious human boy', of course he frolicked and
flirted, grew dandified, aquatic, sentimental, or gymnastic, as
college fashions ordained, hazed and was hazed, talked slang, and
more than once came perilously near suspension and expulsion. But
as high spirits and the love of fun were the causes of these pranks,
he always managed to save himself by frank confession, honorable
atonement, or the irresistible power of persuasion which he possessed
in perfection.  In fact, he rather prided himself on his narrow
escapes, and liked to thrill the girls with graphic accounts of his
triumphs over wrathful tutors, dignified professors, and vanquished
enemies.  The `men of my class', were heroes in the eyes of the girls,
who never wearied of the exploits of `our fellows', and were frequently
allowed to bask in the smiles of these great creatures, when Laurie
brought them home with him.

     Amy especially enjoyed this high honor, and became quite a belle
among them, for her ladyship early felt and learned to use the gift
of fascination with which she was endowed.  Meg was too much absorbed
in her private and particular John to care for any other lords of
creation, and Beth too shy to do more than peep at them and wonder
how Amy dared to order them about so, but Jo felt quite in her own
element, and found it very difficult to refrain from imitating the
gentlemanly attitudes, phrases, and feats, which seemed more natural
to her than the decorums prescribed for young ladies.  They all liked
Jo immensely, but never fell in love with her, though very few escaped
without paying the tribute of a sentimental sigh or two at Amy's
shrine.  And speaking of sentiment brings us very naturally to the
`Dovecote'.

     That was the name of the little brown house Mr. Brooke had pre-
pared for Meg's first home.  Laurie had christened it, saying it was
highly appropriate to the gentle lovers who `went on together like a
pair of turtledoves, with first a bill and then a coo'.  It was a
tiny house, with a little garden behind and a lawn about as big as a
pocket handkerchief in the front.  Here Meg meant to have a fountain,
shrubbery, and a profusion of lovely flowers, though just at present
the fountain was represented by a weather-beaten urn, very like a
dilapidated slopbowl, the shrubbery consisted of several young larches,
undecided whether to live or die, and the profusion of flowers was
merely hinted by regiments of sticks to show where seeds were planted.
But inside, it was altogether charming, and the happy bride saw no
fault from garret to cellar.  To be sure, the hall was so narrow it
was fortunate that they had no piano, for one never could have been
got in whole, the dining room was so small that six people were a
tight fit, and the kitchen stairs seemed built for the express pur-
pose of precipitating both servants and china pell-mell into the
coalbin.  But once get used to these slight blemishes and nothing
could be more complete, for good sense and good taste had presided
over the furnishing, and the result was highly satisfactory. There
were no marble-topped tables, long mirrors, or lace curtains in the
little parlor, but simple furniture, plenty of books, a fine picture
or two, a stand of flowers in the bay window, and, scattered all
about, the pretty gifts which came from friendly hands and were the
fairer for the loving messages they brought.

     I don't think the Parian Psyche Laurie gave lost any of its
beauty because John put up the bracket it stood upon, that any
upholsterer could have draped the plain muslin curtains more grace-
fully than Amy's artistic hand, or that any store-room was ever
better provided with good wishes, merry words, and happy hopes
than that in which Jo and her mother put away Meg's few boxes,
barrels, and bundles, and I am morally certain that the spandy new
kitchen never could have looked so cozy and neat if Hannah had not
arranged every pot and pan a dozen times over, and laid the fire
all ready for lighting the minute `Mis. Brooke came home'.  I also
doubt if any young matron ever began life with so rich a supply of
dusters, holders, and piece bags,for Beth made enough to last till
the silver wedding came round, and invented three different kinds
of dishcloths for the express service of the bridal china.

     People who hire all these things done for them never know
what they lose, for the homeliest tasks get beautified if loving
hands do them, and Meg found so many proofs of this that every-
thing in her small nest, from the kitchen roller to the silver
vase on her parlor table, was eloquent of home love and tender
forethought.

     What happy times they had planning together, what solemn
shopping excursions, what funny mistakes they made, and what
shouts of laughter arose over Laurie's ridiculous bargains.  In
his love of jokes, this young gentleman, though nearly through
college, was a much of a boy as ever.  His last whim had been to
bring with him on his weekly visits some new, useful, and ingenious
article for the young housekeeper.  Now a bag of remarkable clothes-
pins, next, a wonderful nutmeg grater which fell to pieces at the
first trial, a knife cleaner that spoiled all the knives, or a
sweeper that picked the nap neatly off the carpet and left the dirt,
labor-saving soap that took the skin off one's hands, infallible
cements which stuck firmly to nothing but the fingers of the de-
luded buyer, and every kind of tinware, from a toy savings bank for
odd pennies, to a wonderful boiler which would wash articles in its
own steam with every prospect of exploding in the process.

     In vain Meg begged him to stop.  John laughed at him, and Jo
called him `Mr. Toodles'.  He was possessed with a mania for pat-
ronizing Yankee ingenuity, and seeing his friends fitly furnished
forth.  So each week beheld some fresh absurdity.

     Everything was done at last, even to Amy's arranging different
colored soaps to match the different colored rooms, and Beth's sett-
ing the table for the first meal.

     "Are you satisfied?  Does it seem like home, and do you feel
as if you should be happy here?" asked Mrs. March, as she and her
daughter went through the new kingdom arm in arm, for just then
they seemed to cling together more tenderly than ever.

     "Yes, Mother, perfectly satisfied, thanks to you all, and so
happy that I can't talk about it," with a look that was far better
than words.

     "If she only had a servant or two it would be all right," said
Amy, coming out of the parlor, where she had been trying to decide
whether the bronze Mercury looked best on the whatnot or the mantle-
piece.

     "Mother and I have talked that over, and I have made up my
mind to try her way first.  There will be so little to do that with
Lotty to run my errands and help me here and there, I shall only
have enough work to keep me from getting lazy or homesick," answered
Meg tranquilly.

     "Sallie Moffat has four," began Amy.

     "If Meg had four, the house wouldn't hold them, and master and
missis would have to camp in the garden," broke in Jo, who, enveloped
in a big blue pinafore, was giving the last polish to the door handles.

     "Sallie isn't a poor man's wife, and many maids are in keeping
with her fine establishment.  Meg and John begin humbly, but I have
a feeling that there will be quite as much happiness in the little
house as in the big one.  It's a great mistake for young girls like
Meg to leave themselves nothing to do but dress, give orders, and
gossip.  When I was first married, I used to long for my new clothes
to wear out or get torn, so that i might have the pleasure of mending
them, for I got heartily sick of doing fancywork and tending my poc-
ket handkerchief."

     "Why didn't you go into the kitchen and make messes, as Sallie
says she does to amuse herself, though they never turn out well and
the servants laugh at her," said Meg.

     "I did after a while, not to `mess' but to learn of Hannah how
things should be done, that my servants need not laugh at me.  It
was play then, but there came a time when I was truly grateful that
I not only possessed the will but the power to cook wholesome food
for my little girls, and help myself when I could no longer afford
to hire help.  You begin at the other end, Meg, dear, but the lessons
you learn now will be of use to you by-and-by when John is a richer
man, for the mistress of a house, however splendid, should know how
work ought to be done, if she wishes to be well and honestly served."

     "Yes, Mother, I'm sure of that," said Meg, listening respect-
fully to the little lecture, for the best of women will hold forth
upon the all absorbing subject of house keeping.  "Do you know I
like this room most of all in my baby house," added Meg, a minute
after, as they went upstairs and she looked into her well-stored
linen closet.

     Beth was there, laying the snowy piles smoothly on the shelves
and exulting over the goodly array.  All three laughed as Meg spoke,
for that linen closet was a joke.  You see, having said that if Meg
married `that Brooke' she shouldn't have a cent of her money, Aunt
March was rather in a quandary when time had appeased her wrath and
made her repent her vow.  She never broke her word, and was much
exercised in her mind how to get round it, and at last devised a
plan whereby she could satisfy herself.  Mrs. Carrol, Florence's
mamma, was ordered to buy, have made, and marked a generous supply
of house and table linen, and send it as her present, all of which
was faithfully done, but the secret leaked out, and was greatly
enjoyed by the family, for Aunt March tried to look utterly uncon-
scious, and insisted that she could give nothing but the old-
fashioned pearls long promised to the first bride.

     "That's a housewifely taste which I am glad to see.  I had a
young friend who set up housekeeping with six sheets, but she had
finger bowls for company and that satisfied her," said Mrs. March,
patting the damask tablecloths, with a truly feminine appreciation
of their fineness.

     "I haven't a single finger bowl, but this is a setout that will
last me all my days, Hannah says."  And Meg looked quite contented,
as well she might.

     A tall, broad-shouldered young fellow, with a cropped head, a
felt basin of a hat, and a flyaway coat, came tramping down the
road at a great pace, walked over the low fence without stopping to
open the gate, straight up to Mrs. March, with both hands out and
a hearty . ..

     "Here I am, Mother!  Yes, it's all right."

     The last words were in answer to the look the elder lady gave
him, a kindly questioning look which the handsome eyes met so
frankly that the little ceremony closed, as usual, with a motherly
kiss.

     "For Mrs. John Brooke, with the maker's congratulations and
compliments.  Bless you, Beth!  What a refreshing spectacle you
are, Jo.  Amy, you are getting altogether too handsome for a
single lady."

     As Laurie spoke, he delivered a brown paper parcel to Meg,
pilled Beth's hair ribbon, stared at Jo's bib pinafore, and fell
into an attitude of mock rapture before Amy, then shook hands all
round, and everyone began to talk.

     "Where is John?" asked Meg anxiously.

     "Stopped to get the license for tomorrow, ma'am."

     "Which side won the last match, Teddy?" inquired Jo, who per-
sisted in feeling an interest in manly sports despite her nineteen
years.

     "Ours, of course.  Wish you'd been there to see."

     "How is the lovely Miss Randal?" asked Amy with a significant
smile.

     "More cruel than ever.  Don't you see how I'm pining away?"
And Laurie gave his broad chest a sounding slap and heaved a
melodramatic sigh.

     "What's the last joke?  Undo the bundle and see, Meg," said
Beth, eying the knobby parcel with curiosity.

     "It's a useful thing to have in the house in case of fire
or thieves," observed Laurie, as a watchman's rattle appeared,
amid the laughter of the girls.

     "Any time when John is away and you get frightened, Mrs.
Meg, just swing that out of the front window, and it will rouse
the neighborhood in a jiffy.  Nice thing, isn't it?"  And Laurie
gave them a sample of its powers that made them cover up their ears.

     "There's gratitude for you!  And speaking of gratitude reminds
me to mention that you may thank Hannah for saving your wedding cake
from destruction.  I saw it going into your house as I came by, and
if she hadn't defended it manfully I'd have had a pick at it, for it
looked like a remarkably plummy one."

     "I wonder if you will ever grow up, Laurie," said Meg in a
matronly tone.

     "I'm doing my best, ma'am, but can't get much higher, I'm afraid,
as six feet is about all men can do in these degenerate days," res-
ponded the young gentleman, whose head was about level with the little
chandelier.

     "I suppose it would be profanation to eat anything in this spick-
and-span bower, so as I'm tremendously hungry, I propose an adjourn-
ment," he added presently.

     "Mother and I are going to wait for John.  There are some last
things to settle," said Meg, bustling away.

     "Beth and I are going over to Kitty Bryant's to get more flowers
for tomorrow," added Amy, tying a picturesque hat over her picturesque
curls, and enjoying the effect as much as anybody.

     "Come, Jo, don't desert a fellow.  I'm in such a state of exhaus-
tion I can't get home without help.  Don't take off your apron,
whatever you do, it's peculiarly becoming," said Laurie, as Jo bestowed
his especial aversion in her capacious pocket and offered her arm to
support his feeble steps.

     "Now, Teddy, I want to talk seriously to you about tomorrow,"
began Jo, as they strolled away together.  "You must promise to
behave well, and not cut up any pranks, and spoil our plans."

     "Not a prank."

     "And don't say funny things when we ought to be sober."

     "I never do.  You are the one for that."

     "And I implore you not to look at me during the ceremony.  I
shall certainly laugh if you do."

     "You won't see me, you'll be crying so hard that the thick fog
round you will obscure the prospect."

     "I never cry unless for some great affliction."

     "Such as fellows going to college, hey?" cut in Laurie, with
suggestive laugh.

     "Don't be a peacock.  I only moaned a trifle to keep the girls
company."

     "Exactly.  I say, Jo, how is Grandpa this week?  Pretty amiable?"

     "Very.  Why, have you got into a scrape and want to know how
he'll take it?" asked Jo rather sharply.

     "Now, Jo, do you think I'd look your mother in the face and say
`All right', if it wasn't?"  And Laurie stopped short, with an injured
air.

     "No, I don't."

     "Then don't go and be suspicious.  I only want some money," said
Laurie, walking on again, appeased by her hearty tone.

     "You spend a great deal, Teddy."

     "Bless you, I don't spend it, it spends itself somehow, and is
gone before I know it."

     "You are so generous and kind-hearted that you let people borrow,
and can't say `No' to anyone.  We heard about Henshaw and all you did
for him.  If you always spent money in that way, no one would blame
you," said Jo warmly.

     "Oh, he made a mountain out of a molehill.  You wouldn't have me
let that fine fellow work himself to death just for want of a little
help, when he is worth a dozen of us lazy chaps, would you?"

     "Of course not, but I don't see the use of your having seventeen
waistcoats, endless neckties, and a new hat every time you come home.
I thought you'd got over the dandy period, but every now and then it
breaks out in a new spot.  Just now it's the fashion to be hideous,
to make your head look like a scrubbing brush, wear a strait jacket,
orange gloves, and clumping square-toed boots.  If it was cheap
ugliness, I'd say nothing, but it costs as much as the other, and I
don't get any satisfaction out of it."

     Laurie threw back his head, and laughed so heartily at this
attack, that the felt hat fell off, and Jo walked on it, which
insult only afforded him an opportunity for expatiating on the ad-
vantages of a rough-and-ready costume, as he folded up the maltreated
hat, and stuffed it into his pocket.

     "Don't lecture any more, there's a good soul!  I have enough
all through the week, and like to enjoy myself when I come home.
I'll get myself up regardless of expense tomorrow and be a satis-
faction to my friends."

     "I'll leave you in peace if you'll only let your hair grow.
I'm not aristocratic, but I do object to being seen with a person
who looks like a young prize fighter," observed Jo severely.

     "This unassuming style promotes study, that's why we adopt it,"
returned Laurie, who certainly could not be accused of vanity, having
voluntarily sacrificed a handsome curly crop to the demand for quarter-
inch-long stubble.

     "By the way, Jo, I think that little Parker is really getting
desperate about Amy.  He talks of her constantly, writes poetry, and
moons about in a most suspicious manner.  He'd better nip his little
passion in the bud, hadn't he?" added Laurie, in a confidential,
elder brotherly tone, after a minute's silence.

     "Of course he had.  We don't want any more marrying in this
family for years to come.  Mercy on us, what are the children think-
ing of?"  And Jo looked as much scandalized as if Amy and little
Parker were not yet in their teens.

     "It's a fast age, and I don't know what we are coming to, ma'am.
You are a mere infant, but you'll go next, Jo, and we'll be left
lamenting," said Laurie, shaking his head over the degeneracy of the
times.

     "Don't be alarmed.  I'm not one of the agreeable sort.  Nobody
will want me, and it's a mercy, for there should always be one old
maid in a family."

     "You won't give anyone a chance," said Laurie, with a sidelong
glance and a little more color than before in his sunburned face.
"You won't show the soft side of your character, and if a fellow
gets a peep at it by accident and can't help showing that he likes
it, you treat him as Mrs. Gummidge did her sweetheart, throw cold
water over him, and get so thorny no one dares touch or look at you."

     "I don't like that sort of thing.  I'm too busy to be worried
with nonsense, and I think it's dreadful to break up families so.
Now don't say any more  about it.  Meg's wedding has turned all our
heads, and we talk of nothing but lovers and such absurdities.  I
don't wish to get cross, so let's change the subject."  And Jo
looked quite ready to fling cold water on the slightest provocation.

     Whatever his feelings might have been, Laurie found a vent for
them in a long low whistle and the fearful prediction as they parted
at the gate, "Mark my words, Jo, you'll go next."

                         CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

     The June roses over the porch were awake bright and early on
that morning, rejoicing with all their hearts in the cloudless sun-
shine, like friendly little neighbors, as they were.  Quite flushed
with excitement were their ruddy faces, as they swung in the wind,
whispering to one another what they had seen, for some peeped in at
the dining room windows where the feast was spread, some climbed up
to nod and smile at the sisters as they dressed the bride, others
waved a welcome to those who came and went on various errands in
garden, porch, and hall, and all, from the rosiest full-blown
flower to the palest baby bud, offered their tribute of beauty and
fragrance to the gentle mistress who had loved and tended them so
long.

     Meg looked very like a rose herself, for all that was best and
sweetest in heart and soul seemed to bloom into her face that day,
making it fair and tender, with a charm more beautiful than beauty.
Neither silk, lace, nor orange flowers would she have.  "I don't
want a fashionable wedding, but only those about me whom I love,
and to them I wish to look and be my familiar self."

     So she made her wedding gown herself, sewing into it the tender
hopes and innocent romances of a girlish heart.  her sisters braided
up her pretty hair, and the only ornaments she wore were the lilies
of the valley, which `her John' liked best of all the flowers that
grew.

     "You do look just like our own dear Meg, only so very sweet
and lovely that I should hug you if it wouldn't crumple your dress,"
cried Amy, surveying her with delight when all was done.

     "Then I am satisfied.  But please hug and kiss me, everyone,
and don't mind my dress.  I want a great many crumples of this
sort put into it today."  And Meg opened her arms to her sisters,
who clung about her with April faces for a minute, feeling that
the new love had not changed the old.

     "Now I'm going to tie John's cravat for him, and then to stay
a few minutes with Father quietly in the study."  And Meg ran
down to perform these little ceremonies, and then to follow her
mother wherever she went, conscious that in spite of the smiles
on the motherly face, there was a secret sorrow hid in the motherly
heart at the flight of the first bird from the nest.

     As the younger girls stand together, giving the last touches
to their simple toilet, it may be a good time to tell of a few
changes which three years have wrought in their appearance, for
all are looking their best just now.

     Jo's angles are much softened, she has learned to carry her-
self with ease, if not grace.  The curly crop has lengthened into
a thick coil, more becoming to the small head atop of the tall
figure.  There is a fresh color in her brown cheeks, a soft shine
in her eyes, and only gentle words fall from her sharp tongue
today.

     Beth has grown slender, pale, and more quiet than ever.  The
beautiful, kind eyes are larger, and in them lies an expression
that saddens one, although it is not sad itself.  It is the shadow
of pain which touches the young face with such pathetic patience,
but Beth seldom complains and always speaks hopefully of `being
better soon'.

     Amy is with truth considered `the flower of the family', for
at sixteen she has the air and bearing of a full-grown woman, not
beautiful, but possessed of that indescribable charm called grace.
One saw it in the lines of her figure, the make and motion of her
hands, the flow of her dress, the droop of her hair, unconscious
yet harmonious, and as attractive to many as beauty itself.  Amy's
nose still afflicted her, for it never would grow Grecian, so did
her mouth, being too wide,and having a decided chin.  These off-
ending features gave character to her whole face, but she never
could see it, and consoled herself with her wonderfully fair com-
plexion, keen blue eyes, and curls more golden and abundant than
ever.

     All three wore suits of thin silver gray (their best gowns for
the summer), with blush roses in hair and bosom, and all three
looked just what they were, fresh-faced, happy-hearted girls, pausing
a moment in their busy lives to read with wistful eyes the sweetest
chapter in the romance of womanhood.

     There were to be no ceremonious performances, everything was
to be as natural and homelike as possible, so when Aunt March
arrived, she was scandalized to see the bride come running to wel-
come and lead her in, to find the bridegroom fastening up a garland
that had fallen down, and to catch a glimpse of the paternal minister
marching upstairs with a grave countenance and a wine bottle under
each arm.

     "Upon my word, here's a state of things!" cried the old lady,
taking the seat of honor prepared for her, and settling the folds
of her lavender moire with a great rustle.  "You oughtn't to be
seen till the last minute, child."

     "I'm not a show, Aunty, and no one is coming to stare at me,
to criticize my dress, or count the cost of my luncheon.  I'm too
happy to care what anyone says or thinks, and I'm going to have
my little wedding just as I like it.  John, dear, here's your
hammer."  And away went Meg to help `that man' in his highly im-
proper employment.

     Mr. Brooke didn't even say, "Thank you," but as he stooped
for the unromantic tool, he kissed his little bride behind the
folding door, with a look that made Aunt March whisk out her
pocket handkerchief with a sudden dew in her sharp old eyes.

     A crash, a cry, and a laugh from Laurie, accompanied by the
indecorous exclamation, "Jupiter Ammon!  Jo's upset the cake again!"
caused a momentary flurry, which was hardly over when a flock of
cousins arrived, and `the party came in', as Beth used to say when
a child.

     "Don't let that young giant come near me, he worries me worse
than mosquitoes," whispered the old lady to Amy, as the rooms filled
and Laurie's black head towered above the rest.

     "He has promised to be very good today, and he can be perfectly
elegant if he likes," returned Amy, and gliding away to warn Her-
cules to beware of the dragon, which warning caused him to haunt the
old lady with a devotion that nearly distracted her.

     There was no bridal procession, but a sudden silence fell upon
the room as Mr. March and the young couple took their places under
the green arch.  Mother and sisters gathered close, as if loath to
give Meg up.  The fatherly voice broke more than once, which only
seemed to make the service more beautiful and solemn.  The bride-
groom's hand trembled visibly, and no one heard his replies.  But
Meg looked straight up in her husband's eyes, and said, "I will!"
with such tender trust in her own face and voice that her mother's
heart rejoiced and Aunt March sniffed audibly.

     Jo did not cry, though she was very near it once, and was only
saved from a demonstration by the consciousness that Laurie was
staring fixedly at her, with a comical mixture of merriment and
emotion in his wicked black eyes.  Beth kept her face hidden on her
mother's shoulder, but Amy stood like a graceful statue, with a
most becoming ray of sunshine touching her white forehead and the
flower in her hair.

     It wasn't at all the thing, I'm afraid,but the minute she was
fairly married, Meg cried, "The first kiss for Marmee!" and turning,
gave it with her heart on her lips.  During the next fifteen minutes
she looked more like a rose than ever, for everyone availed them-
selves of their privileges to the fullest extent, from Mr. Laurence
to old Hannah, who, adorned with a headdress fearfully and wonder-
fully made, fell upon her in the hall, crying with a sob and a
chuckle, "Bless you, deary, a hundred times!  The cake ain't hurt
a mite, and everything looks lovely."

     Everybody cleared up after that, and said something brilliant,
or tried to, which did just as well, for laughter is ready when
hearts are light.  There was no display of gifts, for they were
already in the little house, nor was there an elaborate breakfast,
but a plentiful lunch of cake and fruit, dressed with flowers. Mr.
Laurence and Aunt March shrugged and smiled at one another when
water, lemonade, and coffee were found to be to only sorts of nec-
tar which the three Hebes carried around.  No one said anything,
till Laurie, who insisted on serving the bride, appeared before her,
with a loaded salver in his hand and a puzzled expression on his
face.

     "Has Jo smashed all the bottles by accident?" he whispered,
"or am I merely laboring under a delusion that I saw some lying
about loose this morning?"

     "No, your grandfather kindly offered us his best, and Aunt
March actually sent some, but Father put away a little for Beth,
and dispatched the rest to the Soldier's Home.  You know he thinks
that wine should be used only in illness, and Mother says that
neither she nor her daughters will ever offer it to any young man
under her roof."

     Meg spoke seriously and expected to see Laurie frown or laugh,
but he did neither, for after a quick look at her, he said, in
his impetuous way,  "I like that!  For I've seen enough harm done
to wish other women would think as you do."

     "You are not made wise by experience, I hope?"  And there was
an anxious accent in Meg's voice.

     "No.  I give you my word for it.  Don't think too well of me,
either, this is not one of my temptations.  Being brought up where
wine is as common as water and almost as harmless, I don't care for
it, but when a pretty girl offers it, one doesn't like to refuse,
you see."

     "But you will, for the sake of others, if not for your own.
Come, Laurie, promise, and give me one more reason to call this the
happiest day of my life."

     A demand so sudden and so serious made the young man hesitate
a moment, for ridicule is often harder to bear than self-denial.
Meg knew that if he gave the promise he would keep it at all costs,
and feeling her power, used it as a woman may for her friend's good.
She did not speak, but she looked up at him with a face made very
eloquent by happiness, and a smile which said, "No one can refuse
me anything today."

     Laurie certainly could not, and with an answering smile, he
gave her his hand, saying heartily, "I promise, Mrs. Brooke!"

     "I thank you, very, very much."

     "And I drink `long life to your resolution', Teddy," cried Jo,
baptizing him with a splash of lemonade, as she waved her glass and
beamed approvingly upon him.

     So the toast was drunk, the pledge made and loyally kept in
spite of many temptations, for with instinctive wisdom, the girls
seized a happy moment to do their friend a service, for which he
thanked them all his life.

     After lunch, people strolled about, by twos and threes, through
the house and garden, enjoying the sunshine without and within.  Meg
and John happened to be standing together in the middle of the grass
plot, when Laurie was seized with an inspiration which put the finish-
ing touch to this unfashionable wedding.

     "All the married people take hands and dance round the new-made
husband and wife, as the Germans do, while we bachelors and spinsters
prance in couples outside!" cried Laurie, promenading down the path
with Amy, with such infectious spirit and skill that everyone else
followed their example without a murmur.  Mr. and Mrs. March, Aunt
and Uncle Carrol began it, others rapidly joined in, even Sallie
Moffat, after a moment's hesitation, threw her train over her arm
and whisked Ned into the ring.  But the crowning joke was Mr. Laur-
ence and Aunt March, for when the stately old gentleman chass'ed
solemnly up to the old lady, she just tucked her cane under arm, and
hopped briskly away to join hands with the rest and dance about the
bridal pair, while the young folks pervaded the garden like butter-
flies on a midsummer day.

     Want of breath brought the impromptu ball to a close, and then
people began to go.

     "I wish you well, my dear, I heartily wish you well, but I think
you'll be sorry for it," said Aunt March to Meg, adding to the bride-
groom, as he led her to the carriage, "You've got a treasure, young
man, see that you deserve it."

     "That is the prettiest wedding I've been to for an age, Ned, and
I don't see why, for there wasn't a bit of style about it," observed
Mrs. Moffat to her husband, as they drove away.

     "Laurie, my lad, if you ever want to indulge in this sort of
thing, get one of those little girls to help you, and I shall be
perfectly satisfied," said Mr. Laurence, settling himself in his
easy chair to rest after the excitement of the morning.

     "I'll do my best to gratify you, Sir," was Laurie's unusually
dutiful reply, as he carefully unpinned the posy Jo had put in his
buttonhole.

     The little house was not far away, and the only bridal journey
Meg had was the quiet walk with John from the old home to the new.
When she came down, looking like a pretty Quakeress in her dove-
colored suit and straw bonnet tied with white, they all gathered
about her to say goodby, as tenderly as if she had been going to
make the grand tour.

     "Don't feel that I am separated from you, Marmee dear, or that
I love you any the less for loving John so much," she said, clinging
to her mother, with full eyes for a moment.  "I shall come every day,
Father, and expect to keep my old place in all your hearts, though I
am married.  Beth is going to be with me a great deal, and the other
girls will drop in now and then to laugh at my housekeeping struggles.
Thank you all for my happy wedding day.  Goodby, goodby!"

     They stood watching her, with faces full of love and hope and
tender pride as she walked away, leaning on her husband's arm, with
her hands full of flowers and the June sunshine brightening her happy
face--and so Meg's married life began.

               CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

     It takes people a long time to learn the difference between
talent and genius, especially ambitious young men and women. Amy
was learning this distinction through much tribulation, for mis-
taking enthusiasm for inspiration, she attempted every branch of
art with youthful audacity.  For a long time there was a lull in
the `mud-pie' business, and she devoted herself to the finest
pen-and-ink drawing, in which she showed such taste and skill that
her graceful handiwork proved both pleasant and profitable.  But
over-strained eyes caused pen and ink to be laid aside for a bold
attempt at poker sketching.

     While this attack lasted, the family lived in constant fear
of a conflagration, for the odor of burning wood pervaded the
house at all hours, smoke issued from attic and shed with alarm-
ing frequency, red-hot pokers lay about promiscuously, and Hannah
never went to bed without a pail of water and the dinner bell at
her door in case of fire.  Raphael's face was found boldly executed
on the underside of the moulding board,and Bacchus on the head of a
beer barrel.  A chanting cherub adorned the cover of the sugar bucket,
and attempts to portray Romeo and Juliet supplied kindling for some
time.

     From fire to oil was a natural transition for burned fingers,
and Amy fell to painting with undiminished ardor.  An artist friend
fitted her out with his castoff palettes, brushes, and colors, and
she daubed away, producing pastoral and marine views such as were
never seen on land or sea.  Her monstrosities in the way of cattle
would have taken prizes at an agricultural fair, and the perilous
pitching of her vessels would have produced seasickness in the most
nautical observer, if the utter disregard to all known rules of
shipbuilding and rigging had not convulsed him with laughter at the
first glance.  Swarthy boys and dark-eyed Madonnas, staring at you
from one corner of the studio, suggested Murillo.  Oily brown shadows
of faces with a lurid streak in the wrong place, meant Rembrandt.
Buxom ladies and dropiscal infants, Rubens, and Turner appeared in
tempests of blue thunder, orange lightning, brown rain, and purple
clouds, with a tomato-colored splash in the middle, which might be
the sun or a bouy,a sailor's shirt or a king's robe, as the spec-
tator pleased.

     Charcoal portraits came next, and the entire family hung in a
row, looking as wild and crocky as if just evoked from a coalbin.
Softened into crayon sketches, they did better, for the likenesses
were good, and Amy's hair, Jo's nose, Meg's mouth, and Laurie's
eyes were pronounced `wonderfully fine'.  A return to clay and
plaster followed, and ghostly casts of her acquaintances haunted
corners of the house, or tumbled off closet shelves onto people's
heads.  Children were enticed in as models, till their incoherent
accounts of her mysterious doings caused Miss Amy to be regarded in
the light of a young ogress.  Her efforts in this line, however,
were brought to an abrupt close by an untoward accident, which
quenched her ardor.  Other models failing her for a time, she under-
took to cast her own pretty foot, and the family were one day alarmed
by an unearthly bumping and screaming and running to the rescue,
found the young enthusiast hopping wildly about the shed with her
foot held fast in a pan full of plaster, which had hardened with
unexpected rapidity.  With much difficulty and some danger she was
dug out, for Jo was so overcome with laughter while she excavated
that her knife went too far, cut the poor foot, and left a lasting
memorial of one artistic attempt, at least.

     After this Amy subsided, till a mania for sketching from nature
set her to haunting river, field, and wood, for picturesque studies,
and sighing for ruins to copy.  She caught endless colds sitting on
damp grass to book `delicious bit', composed of a stone, a stump, one
mushroom, and a broken mullein stalk, or `a heavenly mass of clouds',
that looked like a choice display of featherbeds when done.  She sac-
rificed her complexion floating on the river in the midsummer sun to
study light and shade, and got a wrinkle over her nose trying after
`points of sight', or whatever the squint-and-string performance is
called.

     If `genius is eternal patience', as Michelangelo affirms, Amy
had some claim to the divine attribute, for she persevered in spite
of all obstacles, failures, and discouragements, firmly believing
that in time she should do something worthy to be called `high art'.

     She was learning, doing, and enjoying other things, meanwhile,
for she had resolved to be an attractive and accomplished woman,
even if she never became a great artist.  Here she succeeded better,
for she was one of those happily created beings who please without
effort, make friends everywhere, and take life so gracefully and
easily that less fortunate souls are tempted to believe that such
are born under a lucky star.  Everybody liked her, for among her
good gifts was tact.  She had an instinctive sense of what was
pleasing and proper, always said the right thing to the right person,
did just what suited the time and place, and was so self-possessed
that her sisters used to say, "If Amy went to court without any
rehearsal beforehand, she'd know exactly what to do."

     One of her weaknesses was a desire to move in `our best society',
without being quite sure what the best really was.  Money, position,
fashionable accomplishments, and elegant manners were most desirable
things in her eyes, and she liked to associate with those who poss-
essed them, often mistaking the false for the true, and admiring what
was not admirable.  Never forgetting that by birth she was a gentle-
woman, she cultivated her aristocratic tastes and feelings, so that
when the opportunity came she might be ready to take the place from
which poverty now excluded her.

     "My lady," as her friends called her, sincerely desired to be
a genuine lady, and was so at heart, but had yet to learn that money
cannot buy refinement of nature, that rank does not always confer
nobility, and that true breeding makes itself felt in spite of ex-
ternal drawbacks.

     "I want to ask a favor of you, Mamma," Amy said, coming in
with an important air one day.

     "Well, little girl, what is it?" replied her mother, in whose
eyes the stately young lady still remained `the baby'.

     "Our drawing class breaks up next week, and before the girls
separate for the summer, I want to ask them out here for a day. They
are wild to see the river, sketch the broken bridge, and copy some
of the things they admire in my book.  They have been very kind to
me in many ways, and I am grateful, for they are all rich and I know
I am poor, yet they never made any difference."

     "Why should they?"  And Mrs. March put the question with what
the girls called her `Maria Theresa air'.

     "You know as well as I that it does make a difference with
nearly everyone, so don't ruffle up like a dear, motherly hen, when
your chickens get pecked by smarter birds.  The ugly duckling turned
out a swan, you know."  And Amy smiled without bitterness, for she
possessed a happy temper and hopeful spirit.

     Mrs. March laughed, and smoothed down her maternal pride as
she asked, "Well, my swan, what is your plan?"

     "I should like to ask the girls out to lunch next week, to take
them for a drive to the places they want to see, a row on the river,
perhaps, and make a little artistic fete for them."

     "That looks feasible.  What do you want for lunch?  Cake, sand-
wiches, fruit, and coffee will be all that is necessary, I suppose?"

     "Oh, dear, no!  We must have cold tongue and chicken, French
chocolate and ice cream, besides.  The girls are used to such things,
and I want my lunch to be proper and elegant, though I do work for
my living."

     "How many young ladies are there?" asked her mother, beginning
to look sober.

     "Twelve or fourteen in the class, but I dare say they won't all
come."

     "Bless me, child, you will have to charter an omnibus to carry
them about."

     "Why, Mother, how can you think of such a thing?  Not more than
six or eight will probably come, so I shall hire a beach wagon and
borrow Mr. Laurence's cherry-bounce." (Hannah's pronunciation of
charabanc.)

     "All of this will be expensive, Amy."

     "Not very.  I've calculated the cost, and I'll pay for it myself."

     "Don't you think, dear, that as these girls are used to such
things, and the best we can do will be nothing new, that some simpler
plan would be pleasanter to them, as a change if nothing more, and
much better for us than buying or borrowing what we don't need, and
attempting a style not in keeping with our circumstances?"

     "If I can't have it as I like, I don't care to have it at all.
I know that I can carry it out perfectly well, if you and the girls
will help a little, and I don't see why I can't if I'm willing to pay
for it," said Amy, with the decision which opposition was apt to
change into obstinacy.

     Mrs. March knew that experience was an excellent teacher, and
when it was possible she left her children to learn alone the lessons
which she would gladly have made easier, if they had not objected to
taking advice as much as they did salts and senna.

     "Very well, Amy, if your heart is set upon it, and you see your
way through without too great an outlay of money, time, and temper,
I'll say no more.  Talk it over with the girls, and whichever way
you decide, I'll do my best to help you."

     "Thanks, Mother, you are always so kind."  And away went Amy to
lay her plan before her sisters.

     Meg agreed at once, and promised to her aid, gladly offering
anything she possessed, from her little house itself to her very
best saltspoons.  But Jo frowned upon the whole project and would
have nothing to do with it at first.

     "Why in the world should you spend your money, worry your family,
and turn the house upside down for a parcel of girls who don't care a
sixpence for you?  I thought you had too much pride and sense to
truckle to any mortal woman just because she wears French boots and
rides in a coupe," said Jo, who, being called from the tragic climax
of her novel, was not in the best mood for social enterprises.

     "I don't truckle, and I hate being patronized as much as you do!"
returned Amy indignantly, for the two still jangled when such ques-
tions arose.  "The girls do care for me, and I for them, and there's a
great deal of kindness and sense and talent among them, in spite of
what you call fashionable nonsense.  You don't care to make people
like you, to go into good society, and cultivate your manners and
tastes.  I do, and I mean to make the most of every chance that comes.
You can go through the world with your elbows out and your nose in the
air, and call it independence, if you like.  That's not my way."

     When Amy had whetted her tongue and freed her mind she usually
got the best of it, for she seldom failed to have common sense on her
side, while Jo carried her love of liberty and hate of conventional-
ities to such an unlimited extent that she naturally found herself
worsted in an argument.  Amy's definition of Jo's  idea of independ-
ence was such a good hit that both burst out laughing, and the dis-
cussion took a more amiable turn.  Much against her will, Jo at length
consented to sacrifice a day to Mrs. Grundy, and help her sister
through what she regarded as `a nonsensical business'.

     The invitations were sent, nearly all accepted, and the follow-
ing Monday was set apart for the grand event.  Hannah was out of
humor because her week's work was deranged, and prophesied that "ef
the washin' and ironin' warn't done reg'lar, nothin' would go well
anywheres".  This hitch in the mainspring of the domestic machinery
had a bad effect upon the whole concern, but Amy's motto was `Nil
desperandum', and having made up her mind what to do, she proceeded
to do it in spite of all obstacles.  To begin with, Hannah's cooking
didn't  turn out well.  The chicken was tough, the tongue too salt,
and the chocolate wouldn't froth properly.  Then the cake and ice cost
more than Amy expected, so did the wagon, and various other expenses,
which seemed trifling at the outset, counted up rather alarmingly
afterward.  Beth got a cold and took to her bed.  Meg had an unusual
number of callers to keep her at home, and Jo was in such a divided
state of mind that her breakages, accidents, and mistakes were un-
commonly numerous, serious, and trying.

     It it was not fair on Monday, the young ladies were to come on
Tuesday, and arrangement which aggravated Jo and Hannah to the last
degree.  On Monday morning the weather was in that undecided state
which is more exasperating than a steady pour.  It drizzled a little,
shone a little, blew a little, and didn't make up its mind till it
was too late for anyone else to make up theirs.  Amy was up at dawn,
hustling people out of their beds and through their breakfasts, that
the house might be got in order.  The parlor struck her as looking
uncommonly shabby, but without stopping to sigh for what she had not,
she skillfully made the best of what she had, arranging chairs over
the worn places in the carpet, covering stains on the walls with home-
made statuary, which gave an artistic air to the room, as did the
lovely vases of flowers Jo scattered about.

     The lunch looked charming, and as she surveyed it, she sincerely
hoped it would taste well, and that the borrowed glass, china, and
silver would get safely home again.  The carriages were promised, Meg
and Mother were all ready to do the honors, Beth was able to help
Hannah behind the scenes, Jo had engaged to be as lively and amiable
as an absent mind, and aching head, and a very decided disapproval of
everybody and everything would allow, and as she wearily dressed, Amy
cheered herself with anticipations of the happy moment when, lunch
safely over, she should drive away with her friends for an afternoon
of artistic delights, for the `cherry bounce' and the broken bridge
were her strong points.

     Then came the hours of suspense, during which she vibrated from
parlor to porch, while public opinion varied like the weathercock. A
smart shower at eleven had evidently quenched the enthusiasm of the
young ladies who were to arrive at twelve, for nobody came, and at two
the exhausted family sat down in a blaze of sunshine to consume the
perishable portions of the feast, that nothing might be lost.

     "No doubt about the weather today, they will certainly come, so
we must fly round and be ready for them," said Amy, as the sun woke
her next morning.  She spoke briskly, but in her secret soul she wished
she had said nothing about Tuesday, for her interest like her cake was
getting a little stale.

     "I can't get any lobsters, so you will have to do without salad
today," said Mr. March, coming in half an hour later, with an express-
ion of placid despair.

     "Use the chicken then, the toughness won't matter in a salad," ad-
vised his wife.

     "Hannah left it on the kitchen table a minute, and the kittens got
at it.  I'm very sorry, amy," added Beth, who was still a patroness of
cats.

     "Then I must have a lobster, for tongue alone won't do," said Amy
decidedly.

     "Shall I rush into town and demand one?" asked Jo, with the mag-
nanimity of a martyr.

     "You'd come bringing it home under your arm without any paper,
just to try me.  I'll go myself," answered Amy, whose temper was be-
ginning to fail.

     Shrouded in a thick veil and armed with a genteel traveling basket,
she departed, feeling that a cool drive would soothe her ruffled spirit
and fit her for the labors of the day.  After some delay, the object of
her desire was procured, likewise a bottle of dressing to prevent fur-
ther loss of time at home, and off she drove again, well pleased with
her own forethought.

     As the omnibus contained only one other passenger, a sleepy old
lady, Amy pocketed her veil and beguiled the tedium of the way by
trying to find out where all her money had gone to.  So busy was she
with her card full of refractory figures that she did not observe a
newcomer, who entered without stopping the vehicle, till a masculine
voice said, "Good morning, Miss March," and, looking up, she beheld
one of Laurie's most elegant college friends.  Fervently hoping that
he would get out before she did, Amy utterly ignored the basket at her
feet, and congratulating herself that she had on her new traveling
dress, returned the young man's greeting with her usual suavity and
spirit.

     They got on excellently, for Amy's chief care was soon set at
rest by learning that the gentleman would leave first, and she was
chatting away in a peculiarly lofty strain, when the old lady got out.
In stumbling to the door, she upset the basket, and--oh horror!--the
lobster, in all its vulgar size and brilliancy, was revealed to the
highborn eyes of a Tudor.

     "By Jove, she's forgotten her dinner!" cried the unconscious
youth, poking the scarlet monster into its place with his cane, and
preparing to hand out the basket after the old lady.

     "Please don't--it's--it's mine," murmured Amy, with a face nearly
as red as her fish.

     "Oh, really, I beg pardon.  It's an uncommonly fine one, isn't it?"
said Tudor, with great presence of mind, and an air of sober interest
that did credit to his breeding.

     Amy recovered herself in a breath, set her basket boldly on the
seat, and said, laughing, "Don't you wish you were to have some of the
salad he's going to make, and to see the charming young ladies who are
to eat it?"

     Now that was tact, for two of the ruling foibles of the masculine
mind were touched.  The lobster was instantly surrounded by a halo of
pleasing reminiscences, and curiosity about `the charming young ladies'
diverted his mind from the comical mishap.

     "I suppose he'll laugh and joke over it with Laurie, but I shan't
see them, that's a comfort," thought Amy, as Tudor bowed and departed.

     She did not mention this meeting at home (though she discovered
that, thanks to the upset, her new dress was much damaged by the riv-
ulets of dressing that meandered down the skirt), but went through
with the preparations which now seemed more irksome than before, and
at twelve o'clock all was ready again.  feeling that the neighbors
were interested in her movements, she wished to efface the memory of
yesterday's failure by a grand success today, so she ordered the
`cherry bounce', and drove away in state to meet and escort her guests
to the banquet.

     "There's the rumble, they're coming!  I'll go onto the porch and
meet them.  It looks hospitable, and I want the poor child to have a
good time after all her trouble," said Mrs. March, suiting the action
to the word.  But after one glance, she retired, with an indescribable
expression, for looking quite lost in the big carriage, sat Amy and
one young lady.

     "Run, Beth, and help Hannah clear half the things off the table.
It will be too absurd to put a luncheon for twelve before a single
girl," cried Jo, hurrying away to the lower regions, too excited to
stop even for a laugh.

     In came Amy, quite calm and delightfully cordial to the one
guest who had kept her promise.  The rest of the family, being of
a dramatic turn, played their parts equally well, and Miss Eliott
found them a most hilarious set, for it was impossible to control
entirely the merriment which possessed them.  The remodeled lunch
being gaily partaken of, the studio and garden visited, and art
discussed with enthusiasm, Amy ordered a buggy (alas for the elegant
cherry-bounce), and drove her friend quietly about the neighborhood
till sunset, when `the party went out'.

     As she came walking in, looking very tired but as composed as
ever, she observed that every vestige of the unfortunate fete had
disappeared, except a suspicious pucker about the corners of Jo's
mouth.

     "You've had a loverly afternoon for your drive, dear," said
her mother, as respectfully as if the whole twelve had come.

     "Miss Eliott is a very sweet girl, and seemed to enjoy herself,
I thought," observed Beth, with unusual warmth.

     "Could you spare me some of your cake?  I really need some, I
have so much company, and I can't make such delicious stuff as yours,"
asked Meg soberly.

     "Take it all.  I'm the only one here who likes sweet things, and
it will mold before I can dispose of it," answered Amy, thinking with
a sigh of the generous store she had laid in for such an end as this.

     "It's a pity Laurie isn't here to help us," began Jo, as they sat
down to ice cream and salad for the second time in two days.

     A warning look from her mother checked any further remarks, and
the whole family ate in heroic silence, till Mr. March mildly observed,
"salad was one of the favorite dishes of the ancients, and Evelyn . . ."
Here a general explosion of laughter cut short the `history of salads',
to the great surprise of the learned gentleman.

     "Bundle everything into a basket and send it to the Hummels. Germans
like messes.  I'm sick of the sight of this, and there's no reason you
should all die of a surfeit because I've been a fool," cried Amy, wiping
her eyes.

     "I thought I should have died when I saw you two girls rattling
about in the what-you-call-it, like two little kernels in a very big
nutshell, and Mother waiting in state to receive the throng," sighed
Jo, quite spent with laughter.

     "I'm very sorry you were disappointed, dear, but we all did our
best to satisfy you," said Mrs. March, in a tone full of motherly
regret.

     "I am satisfied.  I've done what I undertook, and it's not my
fault that it failed.  I comfort myself with that," said Amy with a
little quiver in her voice.  "I thank you all very much for helping
me, and I'll thank you still more if you won't allude to it for a
month, at least."

     No one did for several months, but the word `fete' always pro-
duced a general smile, and Laurie's birthday gift to Amy was a tiny
coral lobster in the shape of a charm for her watch guard.

                  CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

     Fortune suddenly smiled upon Jo, and dropped a good luck
penny in her path.  Not a golden penny, exactly, but I doubt
if half a million would have given more real happiness then did
the little sum that came to her in this wise.

     Every few weeks she would shut herself up in her room, put
on her scribbling suit, and `fall into a vortex', as she expressed
it, writing away at her novel with all her heart and soul, for till
that was finished she could find no peace.  Her `scribbling suit'
consisted of a black woolen pinafore on which she could wipe her
pen at will, and a cap of the same material, adorned with a cheer-
ful red bow, into which she bundled her hair when the decks were
cleared for action.  This cap was a beacon to the inquiring eyes of
her family, who during these periods kept their distance, merely
popping in their heads semi-occasionally to ask, with interest,
"Does genius burn, Jo?"  They did not always venture even to ask
this question, but took an observation of the cap, and judged
accordingly.  If this expressive article of dress was drawn low
upon the forehead, it was a sign that hard work was going on, in
exciting moments it was pushed rakishly askew, and when despair
seized the author it was plucked wholly off, and cast upon the
floor, and cast upon the floor. At such times the intruder silently
withdrew, and not until the red bow was seen gaily erect upon the
gifted brow, did anyone dare address Jo.

     She did not think herself a genius by any means, but when the
writing fit came on, she gave herself up to it with entire abandon,
and led a blissful life, unconscious of want, care, or bad weather,
while she sat safe and happy in an imaginary world, full of friends
almost as real and dear to her as any in the flesh.  Sleep forsook
her eyes, meals stood untasted, day and night were all too short to
enjoy the happiness which blessed her only at such times, and made
these hours worth living, even if they bore no other fruit.  The de-
vine afflatus usually lasted a week or two, and then she emerged
from her `vortex', hungry, sleepy, cross, or despondent.

     She was just recovering from one of these attacks when she was
prevailed upon to escort Miss Crocker to a lecture, and in return
for her virtue was rewarded with a new idea.  It was a People's
Course, the lecture on the Pyramids, and Jo rather wondered at the
choice of such a subject for such an audience, but took it for grant-
ed that some great social evil would be remedied or some great want
supplied by unfolding the glories of the Pharaohs to an audience
whose thoughts were busy with the price of coal and flour, and whose
lives were spent in trying to solve harder riddles than that of the
Sphinx.

     They were early, and while Miss Crocker set the heel of her
stocking, Jo amused herself by examining the faces of the people who
occupied the seat with them.  On her left were two matrons, with
massive foreheads and bonnets to match, discussing Women's Rights and
making tatting.  Beyond sat a pair of humble lovers, artlessly hold-
ing each other by the hand, a somber spinster eating peppermints out
of a paper bag, and an old gentleman taking his preparatory nap be-
hind a yellow bandanna.  On her right, her only neighbor was a stud-
ious looking lad absorbed in a newspaper.

     It was a pictorial sheet, and Jo examined the work of art nearest
her, idly wondering what fortuitous concatenation of circumstances
needed the melodramatic illustration of an Indian in full war costume,
tumbling over a precipice with a wolf at his throat, while two infur-
iated young gentlemen, with unnaturally small feet and big eyes, were
stabbing each other close by, and a disheveled female was flying away
in the background with her mouth wide open.  Pausing to turn a page,
the lad saw her looking and, with boyish good nature offered half his
paper, saying bluntly, "want to read it? That's a first-rate story."

     Jo accepted it with a smile, for she had never outgrown her lik-
ing for lads, and soon found herself involved in the usual labyrinth
of love, mystery, and murder, for the story belonged to that class of
light literature in which the passions have a holiday, and when the
author's invention fails, a grand catastrophe clears the stage of one
half the dramatis personae, leaving the other half to exult over their
downfall.

     "Prime, isn't it?" asked the boy, as her eye went down the last
paragraph of her portion.

     "I think you and I could do as well as that if we tried," return-
ed Jo, amused at his admiration of the trash.

     "I should think I was a pretty lucky chap if I could.  She makes
a good living out of such stories,  they say."  And he pointed to the
name of Mrs. S.L.A.N.G. Northbury, under the title of the tale.

     "Do you know her?" asked Jo, with sudden interest.

     "No, but I read all her pieces, and I know a fellow who works in
the office where this paper is printed."

     "Do you say she makes a good living out of stories like this?"
And Jo looked more respectfully at the agitated group and thickly
sprinkled exclamation points that adorned the page.

     "Guess she does!  She knows just what folks like, and gets paid
well for writing it."

     Here the lecture began, but Jo heard very little of it, for while
Professor Sands was prosing away about Belzoni, Cheops, scarabei, and
hieroglyphics, she was covertly taking down the address of the paper,
and boldly resolving to try for the hundred-dollar prize offered in
its columns for a sensational story.  By the time the lecture ended
and the audience awoke, she had built up a splendid fortune for her-
self (not the first founded on paper), and was already deep in the
concoction of her story, being unable to decide whether the duel
should come before the elopement or after the murder.

     she said nothing of her plan at home, but fell to work next day,
much to the disquiet of her mother, who always looked a little anxious
when `genius took to burning'.  Jo had never tried this style before,
contenting herself with very mild romances for THE SPREAD EAGLE.  Her
experience and miscellaneous reading were of service now, for they
gave her some idea of dramatic effect, and supplied plot, language,
and costumes.  Her story was as full of desperation and despair as her
limited acquaintance with those uncomfortable emotions enabled her to
make it, and having located it in Lisbon, she wound up with an earth-
quake, as a striking and appropriate denouement.  The manuscript was
privately dispatched, accompanied by a note, modestly saying that if
the tale didn't get the prize, which the writer hardly dared expect,
she would be very glad to receive any sum it might be considered worth.

     Six weeks is a long time to wait, and a still longer time
for a girl to keep a secret, but Jo did both, and was just begin-
ning to give up all hope of ever seeing her manuscript again,
when a letter arrived which almost took her breath away, for on
opening it, a check for a hundred dollars fell into her lap.  For
a minute she stared at it as if it had been a snake, then she read
her letter and began to cry.  If the amiable gentleman who wrote
that kindly note could have known what intense happiness he was
giving a fellow creature, I think he would devote his leisure hours,
if he has any, to that amusement, for Jo valued the letter more than
the money, because it was encouraging, and after years of effort it
was so pleasant to find that she had learned to do something, though
it was only to write a sensation story.

     A prouder young woman was seldom seen than she, when, having
composed herself, she electrified the family by appearing before them
with the letter in one hand, the check in the other, announcing that
she had won the prize.  Of course there was a great jubilee, and when
the story came everyone read and praised it, though after her father
had told her that the language was good, the romance fresh and hearty,
and the tragedy quite thrilling, he shook his head, and said in his
unworldly way . . .

     "You can do better than this, Jo.  Aim at the highest, and never
mind the money."

     "I think the money is the best part of it.  What will you do with
such a fortune?" asked Amy, regarding the magic slip of paper with a
reverential eye.

     "Send Beth and Mother to the seaside for a month or two," answered
Jo promptly.

     To the seaside they went, after much discussion, and though Beth
didn't come home as plump and rosy as could be desired, she was much
better, while Mrs. March declared she felt ten years younger.  So Jo
was satisfied with the investment of her prize money, and fell to work
with a cheery spirit, bent on earning more of those delightful checks.
She did earn several that year, and began to feel herself a power in
the house, for by the magic of a pen, her `rubbish' turned into com-
forts for them all.  THE DUKE'S DAUGHTER paid the butcher's bill, A
PHANTOM HAND put down a new carpet, and the CURSE OF THE COVENTRYS
proved the blessing of the Marches in the way of groceries and gowns.

     Wealth is certainly a most desirable thing, but poverty has its
sunny side, and one of the sweet uses of adversity is the genuine sat-
isfaction which comes from hearty work of head or hand, and to the
inspiration of necessity, we owe half the wise, beautiful, and useful
blessings  of the world.  Jo enjoyed a taste of this satisfaction,
and ceased to envy richer girls, taking great comfort in the knowledge
that she could supply her own wants, and need ask no one for a penny.

     Little notice was taken of her stories, but they found a market,
and encouraged by this fact, she resolved to make a bold stroke for
fame and fortune.  Having copied her novel for the fourth time, read
it to all her confidential friends, and submitted it with fear and
trembling to three publishers, she at last disposed of it, on condi-
tion that she would cut it down one third, and omit all the parts
which she particularly admired.

     "Now I must either bundle it back in to my tin kitchen to mold,
pay for printing it myself, or chop it up to suit purchasers and get
what I can for it.  Fame is a very good thing to have in the house,
but cash is more convenient, so I wish to take the sense of the meet-
ing on this important subject," said Jo, calling a family council.

     "Don't spoil your book, my girl, for there is more in it than
you know, and the idea is well worked out.  Let it wait and ripen,"
was her father's advice, and he practiced what he preached, having
waited patiently thirty years for fruit of his own to ripen, and
being in no haste to gather it even now when it was sweet and mellow.

     "It seems to me that Jo will profit more by taking the trial
than by waiting," said Mrs. March.  "Criticism is the best test of
such work, for it will show her both unsuspected merits and faults,
and help her to do better next time.  We are too partial, but the
praise and blame of outsiders will prove useful, even if she gets
but little money."

     "Yes," said Jo, knitting her brows, "that's just it.  I've been
fussing over the thing so long, I really don't know whether it's good,
bad, or indifferent.  It will be a great help to have cool, impartial
persons take a look at it, and tell me what they think of it."

     "I wouldn't leave a word out of it.  You'll spoil it if you do,
for the interest of the story is more in the minds than in the actions
of the people, and it will be all a muddle if you don't explain as you
go on," said Meg, who firmly believed that this book was the most re-
markable novel ever written.

     "But Mr. Allen says, `Leave out the explanations, make it brief
and dramatic, and let the characters tell the story'," interrupted
Jo, turning to the publisher's note.

     "Do as he tells you.  He knows what will sale, and we don't.
Make a good, popular book, and get as much money as you can.  By-and-
by, when you've got a name, you can afford to digress, and have
philosophical and metaphysical people in your novels," said Amy, who
took a strictly practical view of the subject.

     "Well," said Jo, laughing, "if my people are `philosophical and
metaphysical', it isn't my fault, for I know nothing about such
things, except what I hear father say;, sometimes.  If I've got some
of his wise ideas jumbled up with my romance, so much the better for
me.  Now, Beth, what do you say?"

     "I should so like to see it printed soon," was all Beth said,
and smiled in saying it. But there was an unconscious emphasis on
the last word, and a wistful look in the eyes that never lost their
childlike candor, which chilled Jo's heart for a minute with a for-
boding fear, and decided her to make her little venture `soon'.

     So, with Spartan firmness, the young authoress laid her first-
born on her table, and chopped it up as ruthlessly as any ogre.  In
the hope of pleasing everyone, she took everyone's advice, and like
the old man and his donkey in the fable suited nobody.

     Her father liked the metaphysical streak which had unconscious-
ly got into it, so that was allowed to remain though she had her
doubts about it. Her mother thought that there was a trifle too much
description.  Out, therefore it came, and with it many necessary
links in the story.  Meg admired the tragedy, so Jo piled up the
agony to suit her, while Amy objected to the fun, and, with the
best intentions in life, Jo quenched the spritly scenes which
relieved the somber character of the story.  Then, to complicate
the ruin, she cut it down one third, and confidingly sent the
poor little romance, like a picked robin, out into the big, busy
world to try its fate.

     Well, it was printed, and she got three hundred dollars for
it, likewise plenty of praise and blame, both so much greater than
she expected that she was thrown into a state of bewilderment from
which it took her some time to recover.

     "You said, Mother, that criticism would help me.  But how can
it,when it's so contradictory that I don't know whether I've written
a promising book or broken all the ten commandments?" cried poor
Jo, turning over a heap of notices, the perusal of which filled her
with pride and joy one minute, wrath and dismay the next.  "This
man says, `An exquisite book, full of truth, beauty, and earnest-
ness.  All is sweet, pure, and healthy.'" continued the perplexed
authoress.  "The next, `The theory of the book is bad, full of
morbid fancies, spiritualistic ideas, and unnatural characters.'
Now, as I had no theory of any kind, don't believe in Spiritualism,
and copied my characters from life, I don't see how this critic can
be right.  Another says, `It's one of the best American novels which
has appeared for years.' (I know better than that), and the next
asserts that `Though it is original, and written with great force
and feeling, it is a dangerous book.' 'Tisn't!  Some make fun of it,
some overpraise, and nearly all insist that I had a deep theory to
expound, when I only wrote it for the pleasure and the money.  I
wish I'd printed the whole or not at all, for I do hate to be so
misjudged."

    Her family and friends administered comfort and commendation
liberally.  Yet it was a hard time for sensitive, high-spirited Jo,
who meant so well and had apparently done so ill.  But it did her
good, for those whose opinion had real value gave her the critism
which is an author's best education, and when the first soreness
was over,she could laugh at her poor little book, yet believe in
it still, and feel herself the wiser and stronger for the buffet-
ing she had received.

     "Not being a genius, like Keats, it won't kill me," she said
stoutly, "and I've got the joke on my side, after all, for the parts
that were taken straight out of real life are denounced as impossible
and absurd, and the scenes that I made up out of my own silly head
are pronounced `charmingly natural, tender, and true'.  So I'll
comfort myself with that, and when I'm ready, I'll up again and take
another."

                   CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

     Like most other young matrons, Meg began her married life
with the determination to be a model housekeeper.  John should
find home a paradise, he should always see a smiling face,
should fare sumptuously every day, and never know the loss of
a button.  She brought so much love, energy, and cheerfulness
to the work that she could not but succeed, in spite of some
obstacles.  Her paradise was not a tranquil one, for the little
woman fussed, was over-anxious to please, and bustled about like
a true Martha, cumbered with many cares.  She was too tired, some-
times, even to smile, John grew dyspeptic after a course of dainty
dishes and ungratefully demanded plain fare.  As for buttons, she
soon learned to wonder where they went, to shake her head over the
carelessness of men, and to threaten to make him sew them on him-
self, and see if his work would stand impatient and clumsy fingers
any better than hers.

     They were very happy, even after they discovered that they
couldn't live on love alone.  John did not find Meg's beauty dimin-
ished, though she beamed at him from behind the familiar coffee pot.
Nor did Meg miss any of the romance from the daily parting, when her
husband followed up his kiss with the tender inquiry, "Shall I send
some veal or mutton for dinner, darling?"  The little house ceased
to be a glorified bower, but it became a home, and the young couple
soon felt that it was a change for the better.  At first they play-
ed keep-house, and frolicked over it like children.  Then John took
steadily to business, feeling the cares of the head of a family upon
his shoulders, and Meg laid by her cambric wrappers, put on a big
apron, and fell to work, as before said, with more energy than dis-
cretion.

     While the cooking mania lasted she went through Mrs. Cornelius's
Receipt Book as if it were a mathematical exercise, working out the
problems with patience and care.  Sometimes her family were invited
in to help eat up a too bounteous feast of successes, or Lotty would
be privately dispatched with a batch of failures, which were to be
concealed from all eyes in the convenient stomachs of the little
Hummels. An evening with John over the account books usually pro-
duced a temporary lull in the culinary enthusiasm, and a frugal fit
would ensue, during which the poor man was put through a course of
bread pudding, hash, and warmed-over coffee, which tried his soul,
although he bore it with praiseworthy fortitude.  Before the golden
mean was found, however, Meg added to her domestic possessions what
young couples seldom get on long without, a family jar.

     Fired a with housewifely wish to see her storeroom stocked with
homemade preserves, she undertook to put up her own currant jelly.
John was requested to order home a dozen or so of little pots and an
extra quantity of sugar, for their own currants were ripe and were
to be attended to at once.  As John firmly believed that `my wife'
was equal to anything, and took a natural pride in her skill, he
resolved that she should be gratified, and their only crop of fruit
laid by in a most pleasing form for winter use.  Home came four
dozen delightful little pots, half a barrel of sugar, and a small
boy to pick the currants for her. With her pretty hair tucked into
a little cap, arms bared to the elbow, and a checked apron which
had a coquettish look in spite of the bib, the young housewife fell
to work, feeling no doubts about her success, for hadn't she seen
Hannah do it hundreds of times?  The array of pots rather amazed her
at first, but John was so fond of jelly, and the nice little jars
would look so well on the top shelf, that Meg resolved to fill them
all, and spend a long day picking, boiling, straining, and fussing
over her jelly.  She did her best, she asked advice of Mrs. Corne-
lius, she racked her brain to remember what Hannah did that she left
undone, she reboiled, resugared, and restrained, but that dreadful
stuff wouldn't `jell'.

     She longed to run home, bib and all, and ask Mother to lend her
a hand, but John and she had agreed that they would never annoy any-
one with their private worries, experiments, or quarrels.  They had
laughed over that last word as if the idea it suggested was a most
preposterous one, but they had held to their resolve, and whenever
they could get on without help they did so, and no one interfered,
for Mrs. March had advised the plan.  So Meg wrestled alone with the
refractory sweetmeats all that hot summer day, and at five o'clock
sat down in her topsy-turvey kitchen, wrung her bedaubed hands,
lifted up her voice and wept.

     Now, in the first flush of the new life, she had often said,
"My husband shall always feel free to bring a friend home whenever
he likes.  I shall always be prepared. There shall be no flurry, no
scolding, no discomfort, but a neat house, a cheerful wife, and a
good dinner.  John, dear, never stop to ask my leave, invite whom
you please, and be sure of a welcome from me."

     How charming that was, to be sure!  John quite glowed with
pride to hear her say it, and felt what a blessed thing it was to
have a superior wife.  But, although they had had company from time
to time, it never happened to be unexpected, and Meg had never had
an opportunity to distinguish herself till now.  It always happens
so in this vale of tears, there is an inevitability about such things
which we can only wonder at, deplore, and bear as we best can.

     If John had not forgotten all about the jelly, it really would
have been unpardonable in him to choose that day, of all the days in
the year, to bring a friend home to dinner unexpectedly.  Congratu-
lating himself that a handsome repast had been ordered that morning,
feeling sure that it would be ready to the minute, and indulging in
pleasant anticipations of the charming effect it would produce, when
his pretty wife came running out to meet him, he escorted his friend
to his mansion, with the irrepressible satisfaction of a young host
and husband.

     It is a world of disappointments, as John discovered when he
reached the Dovecote.  the front door usually stood hospitably open.
Now it was not only shut, but locked, and yesterday's mud still
adorned the steps.  The parlor windows were closed and curtained,
no picture of the pretty wife sewing on the piazza, in white, with
a distracting little bow in her hair, or a bright-eyed hostess,
smiling a shy welcome as she greeted her guest.  Nothing of the sort,
for not a soul appeared but a sanginary-looking boy asleep under the
current bushes.

     "I'm afraid something has happened.  Step into the garden, Scott,
while I look up Mrs. Brooke," said John, alarmed at the silence and
solitude.

     Round the house he hurried, led by a pungent smell of burned
sugar, and Mr. Scott strolled after him, with a queer look on his
face.  He paused discreetly at a distance when Brooke disappeared,
but he could both see and hear, and being a bachelor, enjoyed the
prospect mightily.

     In the kitchen reigned confusion and despair.  One edition of
jelly was trickled from pot to pot, another lay upon the floor,
and a third was burning gaily on the stove.  Lotty, with Teutonic
phlegm, was calmly eating bread and currant wine, for the jelly was
still in a hopelessly liquid state, while Mrs. Brooke, with her apron
over her head, sat sobbing dismally.

     "My dearest girl, what is the matter?" cried John, rushing in,
with awful visions of scalded hands, sudden news of affliction, and
secret consternation at the thought of the guest in the garden.

     "Oh, John, I am so tired and hot and cross and worried!  I've
been at it till I'm all worn out.  Do come and help me or I shall
die!"  And the exhausted housewife cast herself upon his breast,
giving him a sweet welcome in every sense of the word, for her
pinafore had been baptized at the same time as the floor.

     "What worries you dear?  Has anything dreadful happened?"
asked the anxious John, tenderly kissing the crown of the little
cap, which was all askew.

     "Yes," sobbed Meg despairingly.

     "Tell me quick, then.  Don't cry. I can bear anything better
than that.  Out with it, love."

     "The . . .The jelly won't jell and I don't know what to do!"

     John Brooke laughed then as he never dared to laugh afterward,
and the derisive Scott smiled involuntarily as he heard the hearty
peal, which put the finishing stroke to poor Meg's woe.

     "Is that all?  Fling it out of the window, and don't bother any
more about it.  I'll buy you quarts if you want it, but for heaven's
sake don't have hysterics, for I've brought Jack Scott home to dinner,
and . . ."

     John got no further, for Meg cast him off, and clasped her hands
with a tragic gesture as she fell into a chair, exclaiming in a tone
of mingled indignation, reproach, and dismay . . .

     "A man to dinner, and everything in a mess!  John Brooke, how
could you do such a thing?"

     "Hush, he's in the garden!  I forgot the confounded jelly, but
it can't be helped now," said John, surveying the prospect with an
anxious eye.

     "You ought to have sent word, or told me this morning, and you
ought to have remembered how busy I was," continued Meg petulantly,
for even turtledoves will peck when ruffled.

     "I didn't know it this morning, and there was no time to send
word, for I met him on the way out.  I never thought of asking leave,
when you have always told me to do as I liked.  I never tried it
before, and hang me if I ever do again!" added John, with an aggriev-
ed air.

     "I should hope not!  Take him away at once.  I can't see him,
    and there isn't any dinner."

     "Well, I like that!  Where's the beef and vegetables I sent
home, and the pudding you promised?" cried John, rushing to the
larder.

     "I hadn't time to cook anything.  I meant to dine at Mother's.
I'm sorry, but I was so busy," and Meg's tears began again.

     John was a mild man, but he was human, and after a long day's
work to come home tired, hungry, and hopeful, to find a chaotic
house, an empty table, and a cross wife was not exactly conductive
to repose of mind or manner.  He restrained himself however, and the
little squall would have blown over, but for one unlucky word.

     "It's a scrape, I acknowledge, but if you will lend a hand,
we'll pull through and have a good time yet.  Don't cry, dear, but
just exert yourself a bit, and fix us up something to eat.  We're
both as hungry as hunters, so we shan't mind what it is.  Give us
the cold meat, and bread and cheese.  We won't ask for jelly."

     He meant it to be a good-natured joke, but that one word sealed
his fate.  Meg thought it was too cruel to hint about her sad failure,
and the last atom of patience vanished as he spoke.

     "You must get yourself out of the scrape as you can.  I'm too
used up to `exert' myself for anyone.  It's like a man to propose
a bone and vulgar bread and cheese for company.  I won't have any-
thing of the sort in my house.  Take that Scott up to Mother's, and
tell him I'm away, sick, dead, anything.  I won't see him, and you
two can laugh at me and my jelly as much as you like.  You won't
have anything else here."  And having delivered her defiance all
on one breath, Meg cast away her pinafore and precipitately left the
field to bemoan herself in her own room.

     What those two creatures did in her absence, she never knew,
but Mr. scott was not taken `up to Mother's', and when Meg descended,
after they had strolled away together, she found traces of a promis-
cuous lunch which filled her with horror.  Lotty reported that they
had eaten "a much, and greatly laughed, and the master bid her throw
away all the sweet stuff, and hide the pots."

     Meg longed to go and tell Mother, but a sense of shame at her
own short comings, of loyalty to John, "who might be cruel, but
nobody should know it," restrained her, and after a summary cleaning
up, she dressed herself prettily, and sat down to wait for John to
come and be forgiven.

     Unfortunately, John didn't come, not seeing the matter in that
light.  He had carried it off as a good joke with Scott, excused his
little wife as well as he could, and played the host so hospitably
that his friend enjoyed the impromptu dinner, and promised to come
again, but John was angry, though he did not show it, he felt that
Meg had deserted him in his hour of need.  "It wasn't fair to tell
a man to bring folks home any time, with perfect freedom, and when
he took you at your word, to flame up and blame him, and leave him
in the lurch, to be laughed at or pitied. No, by George, it wasn't!
And Meg must know it."

     He had fumed inwardly during the feast, but when the flurry was
over and he strolled home after seeing Scott off, a milder mood came
over him. "Poor little thing!  It was hard upon her when she tried so
heartily to please me.  She was wrong, of course, but then she was
young.  I must be patient and teach her."  He hoped she had not gone
home--he hated gossip and interference.  For a minute he was ruffled
again at the mere thought of it, and then the fear that Meg would cry
herself sick softened his heart, and sent him on at a quicker pace,
resolving to be calm and kind, but firm, quite firm, and show her
where she had failed in her duty to her spouse.

     Meg likewise resolved to be `calm and kind, but firm', and show
him his duty.  She longed to run to meet him, and beg pardon, and be
kissed and comforted, as she was sure of being, but, of course, she
did nothing of the sort, and when she saw John coming, began to hum
quite naturally, as she rocked and sewed, like a lady of leisure in
her best parlor.

     John was a little disappointed not to find a tender Niobe, but
feeling that his dignity demanded the first apology, he made none,
only came leisurely in and laid himself upon the sofa with the sing-
ularly relevant remark, "We are going to have a new moon, my dear."

     "I've no objection," was Meg's equally soothing remark.  A few
other topics of general interest were introduced by Mr. Brooke and
wet-blanketed by Mrs. Brooke, and conversation languished.  John
went to one window, unfolded his paper, and wrapped himself in it,
figuratively speaking.  Meg went to the other window, and sewed as
if new rosettes for slippers were among the necessaries of life.
Neither spoke.  Both looked quite `calm and firm', and both felt
desperately uncomfortable.

     "Oh, dear," thought Meg, "married life is very trying, and
does need infinite patience as well as love, as Mother says."  The
word `Mother' suggested other maternal counsels given long ago, and
received with unbelieving protests.

     "John is a good man, but he has his faults, and you must learn
to see and bear with them, remembering your own.  He is very decided,
but never will be obstinate, if you reason kindly, not oppose impat-
iently.  He is very accurate, and particular about the truth--a good
trait, though you call him `fussy'.  Never deceive him by look or
word, Meg, and he will give you the confidence you deserve, the
support you need.  He has a temper, not like ours--one flash and then
all over--but the white, still anger that is seldom stirred, but
once kindled is hard to quench.  Be careful, be very careful, not to
wake his anger against yourself, for peace and happiness depend on
keeping his respect.  Watch yourself, be the first to ask pardon if
you both err, and guard against the little piques, misunderstandings,
and hasty words that often pave the way for bitter sorrow and regret."

     These words came back to Meg, as she sat sewing in the sunset,
especially the last.  This was the first serious disagreement, her
own hasty speeches sounded both silly and unkind, as she recalled
them, her own anger looked childish now, and thoughts of poor John
coming home to such a scene quite melted her heart.  She glanced at
him with tears in her eyes, but he did not see them. She put down
her work and got up, thinking, "I will be the first to say, `For-
give me', but he did not seem to hear her.  She went very slowly
across the room, for pride was hard to swallow, and stood by him,
but he did not turn his head.  For a minute she felt as if she
really couldn't do it, then came the thought, This is the beginn-
ing.  I'll do my part, and have nothing to reproach myself with,"
and stooping sown, she softly kissed her husband on the forehead.
Of course that settled it.  The penitent kiss was better than a
world of words, and John had her on his knee in a minute, saying
tenderly . . .

     "It was too bad to laugh at the poor little jelly pots.  For-
give me, dear.  I never will again!"

     But he did, oh bless you, yes, hundreds of times, and so did
Meg, both declaring that it was the sweetest jelly they ever made,
for family peace was preserved in that little family jar.

     After this, Meg had Mr. Scott to dinner by special invitation,
and served him up a pleasant feast without a cooked wife for the
first course, on which occasion she was so gay and gracious, and
made everything go off so charmingly, that Mr. Scott told John he
was a lucky fellow, and shook his head over the hardships of bach-
elorhood all the way home.

     In the autumn, new trials and experiences came to Meg.  Sallie
Moffat renewed her friendship, was always running out for a dish of
gossip at the little house, or inviting `that poor dear' to come in
and spend the day at the big house.  It was pleasant, for in dull
weather Meg often felt lonely.  All were busy at home, John absent
till night, and nothing to do but sew, or read, or potter about. So
it naturally fell out that Meg got into the way of gadding and gossip-
ing with her friend.  Seeing Sallie's pretty things made her long for
such, and pity herself because she had not got them.  Sallie was very
kind, and often offered her the coveted trifles, but Meg declined
them, knowing that John wouldn't like it, and then this foolish little
woman went and did what John disliked even worse.

     She knew her husband's income, and she loved to feel that he
trusted her, not only with his happiness, but what some men seem to
value more--his money.  She knew where it was, was free to take what
she liked, and all he asked was that she should keep account of every
penny, pay bills once a month, and remember that she was a poor man's
wife.  Till now she had done well, been prudent and exact, kept her
little account books neatly, and showed them to him monthly without
fear.  But that autumn the serpent got into Meg's paradise, and tempt-
ed her like many a modern Eve, not with apples, but with dress.  Meg
didn't like to be pitied and made to feel poor.  It irritated her,
but she was ashamed to confess it, and now and then she tried to con-
sole herself by buying something pretty, so that Sallie needn't think
she had to economize.  She always felt wicked after it, for the pretty
things were seldom necessaries, but then they cost so little, it wasn't
worth worrying about, so the trifles increased unconsciously, and in
the shopping excursions she was no longer a passive looker-on.

     But the trifles cost more than one would imagine, and when she
cast up her accounts at the end of the month the sum total rather
scared her.  John was busy that month and left the bills to her, the
next month he was absent, but the third he had a grand quarterly
settling up, and Meg never forgot it.  A few days before she had done
a dreadful thing, and it weighed upon her conscience.  Sallie had
been buying silks, and Meg longed for a new one, just a handsome light
one for parties, her black silk was so common, and thin things for
evening wear were only proper for girls.  Aunt March usually gave the
sisters a present of twenty-five dollars apiece at New Year's.  That
was only a month to wait, and here was a lovely violet silk going at
a bargain, and she had the money, if she only dared to take it.  John
always said what was his was hers, but would he think it right to
spend not only the prospective five-and-twenty, but another five-and-
twenty out of the household fund?  That was the question.  Sallie
had urged her to do it, had offered to lend the money, and with the
best intentions in life had tempted Meg beyond her strength.  In an
evil moment the shopman held up the lovely, shimmering folds, and
said,  "A bargain, I assure, you, ma'am." She answered, "I'll take
it,"  and it was cut off and paid for, and Sallie had exulted, and
she had laughed as if it were a thing of no consequence, and driven
away, feeling as if she had stolen something, and the police were
after her.

     When she got home, she tried to assuage the pangs of remorse
by spreading forth the lovely silk, but it looked less silvery now,
didn't become her, after all, and the words `fifty dollars' seemed
stamped like a pattern down each breadth.  She put it away, but it
haunted her, not delightfully as a new dress should, but dreadfully
like the ghost of a folly that was not easily laid.  When John got
out his books that night, Meg's heart sank, and for the first time
in her married life, she was afraid of her husband.  The kind, brown
eyes looked as if they could be stern, and though he was unusually
merry, she fancied he had found her out, but didn't mean to let her
know it.  The house bills were all paid, the books all in order.
John had praised her, and was undoing the old pocketbook which they
called the `bank', when Meg, knowing that it was quite empty, stopped
his hand, saying nervously . . .

     "You haven't seen my private expense book yet."

     John never asked to see it, but she always insisted on his doing
so, and used to enjoy his masculine amazement at the queer things women
wanted, and made him guess what piping was, demand fiercely the mean-
ing of a hug-me-tight, or wonder how a little thing composed of three
rosebuds, a bit of velvet, and a pair of strings, could possibly be
a bonnet, and cost six dollars.  That night he looked as if he would
like the fun of quizzing her figures and pretending to be horrified
at her extravagance, as he often did, being particularly proud of
his prudent wife.

     The little book was brought slowly out and laid down before him.
Meg got behind his chair under pretense of smoothing the wrinkles
out of his tired forehead, and standing there, she said, with her
panic increasing with every word . ..

     "John, dear, I'm ashamed to show you my book, for I've really
been dreadfully extravagant lately.  I go about so much I must have
things, you know, and Sallie advised my getting it, so I did, and
my New Year's money will partly pay for it, but I was sorry after
I had done it, for I knew you'd think it wrong in me."

     John laughed, and drew her round beside him, saying good-
humoredly,  "Don't go and hide.  I won't beat you if you have got
a pair of killing boots.  I'm rather proud of my wife's feet, and
don't mind if she does pay eight or nine dollars for her boots, if
they are good ones."

     That had been one of her last `trifles', and John's eye had
fallen on it as he spoke.  "Oh, what will he say when he comes to
that awful fifty dollars!" thought Meg, with a shiver.

     "It's worse than boots, it's a silk dress," she said, with the
calmness of desperation, for she wanted the worst over.

     "Well, dear, what is the `dem'd total', as Mr. Mantalini says?"

     That didn't sound like John, and she knew he was looking up at
her with the straightforward look that she had always been ready to
meet and answer with one as frank till now.  She turned the page and
her head at the same time, pointing to the sum which would have been
bad enough without the fifty, but which was appalling to her with
that added.  For a minute the room was very still, then John said
slowly--but she could feel it cost him an effort to express no dis-
pleasure-- . . .

     "Well, I don't know that fifty is much for a dress, with all
the furbelows and notions you have to have to finish it off these
days."

     "It isn't made or trimmed," sighed Meg, faintly, for a sudden
recollection of the cost still to be incurred quite overwhelmed her.

     "Twenty-five yards of silk seems a good deal to cover one small
woman, but I've no doubt my wife will look as fine as Ned Moffat's
when she gets it on," said John dryly.

     "I know you are angry, John, but I can't help it.  I don't mean
to waste your money, and I didn't think those little things would
count up so.  I can't resist them when I see Sallie buying all she
wants, and pitying me because I don't.  I try to be contented, but
it is hard, and I'm tired of being poor."

     The last words were spoken so low she thought he did not hear
them, but he did, and they wounded him deeply, for he had denied
himself many pleasures for Meg's sake.  She could have bitten her
tongue out the minute she had said it, for John pushed the books
away and got up, saying with a little quiver in his voice,  "I was
afraid of this.  I do my best, Meg."  If he had scolded her, or
even shaken her, it would not have broken her heart like those few
words.  She ran to him and held him close, crying, with repentant
tears, "Oh, John, my dear, kind, hard-working boy.  I didn't mean
it!  It was so wicked, so untrue and ungrateful, how could I say it!
Oh, how could I say it!"

     He was very kind, forgave her readily, and did not utter one
reproach, but Meg knew that she had done and said a thing which
would not be forgotten soon, although he might never allude to it
again.  She had promised to love him for better or worse, and then
she, his wife, had reproached him with his poverty, after spending
his earnings recklessly.  It was dreadful, and the worst of it was
John went on so quietly afterward, just as if nothing had happened,
except that he stayed in town later, and worked at night when she
had gone to cry herself to sleep.  A week or remorse nearly made
Meg sick, and the discovery that John had countermanded the order
for his new greatcoat reduced her to a state of despair which was
pathetic to behold.  He had simply said, in answer to her surprised
inquiries as to the change, "I can't afford it, my dear."

     Meg said no more, but a few minutes after he found her in the
hall with her face buried in the old greatcoat, crying as if her
heart would break.

     They had a long talk that night, and Meg learned to love her
husband better for his poverty, because it seemed to have made a
man of him, given him the strength and courage to fight his own
way, and taught him a tender patience with which to bear and com-
fort the natural longings and failures of those he loved.

     Next day she put her pride in her pocket, went to Sallie, told
the truth, and asked her to buy the silk as a favor.  The good-
natured Mrs. Moffat willingly did so, and had the delicacy not to
make her a present of it immediately afterward.  Then Meg ordered
home the greatcoat, and when John arrived, she put it on, and asked
him how he liked her new silk gown.  One can imagine what answer he
made, how he received his present, and what a blissful state of
things ensued. John came home early, Meg gadded no more, and that
greatcoat was put on in the morning by a very happy husband, and
taken off at night by a most devoted little wife.  So the year
rolled round, and at midsummer there came to Meg a new experience,
the deepest and tenderest of a woman's life.

     Laurie came sneaking into the kitchen of the Dovecote one
Saturday, with an excited face, and was received with the clash
of cymbals, for Hannah clapped her hands with a saucepan in one
and the cover in the other.

     "How's the little mamma?  Where is everybody?  Why didn't
you tell me before I came home?"  began Laurie in a loud whisper.

     "Happy as a queen, the dear!  Every soul of `em is upstairs
a worshipin'.  We didn't want no hurrycanes round. Now you go
into the parlor, and I'll send `em down to you," with which some-
what involved reply Hannah vanished, chuckling ecstatically.

     Presently Jo appeared, proudly bearing a flannel bundle laid
forth upon a large pillow.  Jo's face was very sober, but her eyes
twinkled, and there was an odd sound in her voice of repressed
emotion of some sort.

     "Shut your eyes and hold out your arms,"  she said invitingly.

     Laurie backed precipitately into a corner, and put his hands
behind him with an imploring gesture.  "No, thank you.  I'd rather
not.  I shall drop it or smash it, as sure as fate."

     "Then you shan't see your nevvy," said Jo decidedly, turning
as if to go.

     "I will, I will!  Only you must be responsible for damages."
And obeying orders, Laurie heroically shut his eyes while some-
thing was put into his arms.  A peal of laughter from Jo, Amy,
Mrs. March, Hannah, and John caused him to open them the next
minute, to find himself invested with two babies instead of one.

     No wonder they laughed, for the expression of his face was
droll enough to convulse a Quaker, as he stood and stared wildly
from the unconscious innocents to the hilarious spectators with
such dismay that Jo sat down on the floor and screamed.

     "Twins, by Jupiter!"  was all he said for a minute, then
turning to the women with an appealing look that was comically
piteous, he added,  "Take `em quick, somebody!  I'm going to
laugh, and I shall drop `em."

      Jo rescued his babies, and marched up and down, with one
on each are, as if already initiated into the mysteries of baby-
tending, while Laurie laughed till the tears ran down his cheeks.

     "It's the best joke of the season, isn't it?  I wouldn't have
told you, for I set my heart on surprising you, and I flatter my-
self I've done it," said Jo, when she got her breath.

     "I never was more staggered in my life.  Isn't it fun?  Are
they boys?  What are you going to name them?  Let's have another
look.  Hold me up, Jo, for upon my life it's one too many for me,"
returned Laurie, regarding the infants with the air of a big,
benevolent Newfoundland looking at a pair of infantile kittens.

     "Boy and girl.  Aren't they beauties?"  said the proud papa,
beaming upon the little red squirmers as if they were unfledged
angels.

     "Most remarkable children I ever saw.  Which is which?" and
Laurie bent like a well-sweep to examine the prodigies.

     "Amy put a blue ribbon on the boy and a pink on the girl,
French fashion, so you can always tell.  Besides, one has blue
eyes and one brown.  Kiss them, Uncle Teddy," said wicked Jo.

     "I'm afraid they mightn't like it," began Laurie, with un-
usual timidity in such matters.

     "Of course they will, they are used to it now.  Do it this
minute, sir!" commanded JO, fearing he might propose a proxy.

     Laurie screwed up his face and obeyed with a gingerly peck
at each little cheek that produced another laugh, and made the
babies squeal.

     "There, I knew they didn't like it!  That's the boy, see
him kick, he hits out with his fists like a good one.  Now then,
young Brooke, pitch into a man of your own size, will you?" cried
Laurie, delighted with a poke in the face from a tiny fist, flapp-
ing aimlessly about.

     "He's to be named John Laurence, and the girl Margaret, after
mother and grandmother.  We shall call her Daisey, so as not to
have two Megs, and I suppose the mannie will be Jack, unless we
find a better name," said Amy, with aunt-like interest.

     "Name him Demijohn, and call him Demi for short," said Laurie

     "Daisy and Demi, just the thing!  I knew Teddy would do it,"
cried Jo clapping her hands.

     Teddy certainly had done it that time, for the babies were
`Daisy' and `Demi' to the end of the chapter.

               CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

     "Come, Jo, it's time."

     "For what?"

     "You don't mean to say you have forgotten that you promised
to make half a dozen calls with me today?"

     "I've done a good many rash and foolish things in my life,
but I don't think I ever was mad enough to say I'd make six calls
in one day, when a single one upsets me for a week."

     "Yes, you did, it was a bargain between us.  I was to finish
the crayon of Beth for you, and you were to go properly with me,
and return our neighbors' visits."

     "If it was fair, that was in the bond, and I stand to the
letter of my bond, Shylock.  There is a pile of clouds in the east,
it's not fair, and I don't go."

     "Now, that's shirking.  It's a lovely day, no prospect of rain,
and you pride yourself on keeping; promises, so be honorable, come
and do your duty, and then be at peace for another six months."

     At that minute Jo was particularly absorbed in dressmaking,
for she was mantua-maker general to the family, and took especial
credit to herself because she could use a needle as well as a pen.
It was very provoking to be arrested in the act of a first trying-
on, and  ordered out to make calls in her best array on a warm
July day.  She hated calls of the formal sort, and never made any
till Amy compelled her with a bargain, bribe, or promise.  In the
present instance there was no escape, and having clashed her scissors
rebelliously, while protesting that she smelled thunder, she gave in,
put away her work, and taking up her hat and gloves with an air of
resignation, told Amy the victim was ready.

     "Jo March, you are perverse enough to provoke a saint!  You
don't intend to make calls in that state, I hope,: cried Amy, sur-
veying her with amazement.

     "Why not?  I'm neat and cool and comfortable, quite proper
for a dusty walk on a warm day.   If people care more for my
clothes than they do for me, I don't wish to see them.  You can
dress for both, and be as elegant as you please.  It pays for
you to be fine.  It doesn't for me, and furbelows only worry me."

     "Oh, dear!" sighed Amy, "now she's in a contrary fit, and
will drive me distracted before I can get her properly ready.
I'm sure it's no pleasure to me to go today, but it's a debt we
owe society, and there's no one to pay it but you and me.  I'll
do anything for you, Jo, if you'll only dress yourself nicely,
and come and help me do the civil.  You can talk so well, look
so aristocratic in your best things, and behave so beautifully,
if you try, that I'm proud of you.  I'm afraid to go alone, do
come and take care of me."

     "You're an artful little puss to flatter and wheedle your
cross old sister in that way.  The idea of my being aristocratic
and well-bred, and your being afraid to go anywhere alone!  I
don't know which is the most absurd.  Well, I'll go if I must,
and do my best.  You shall be commander of the expedition, and
I'll obey blindly, will that satisfy you?" said Jo, with a sudden
change from perversity to lamblike submission.

     "You're a perfect cherub!  Now put on all your best things,
and I'll tell you how to behave at each place, so that you will
make a good impression.  I want people to like you, and they
would if you'd only try to be a little more agreeable.  Do your
hair the pretty way, and put the pink rose in your bonnet.  It's
becoming, and you look too sober in your plain suit.  Take your
light gloves and the embroidered handkerchief.  We'll stop at
Meg's, and borrow her white sunshade, and then you can have my
dove-colored one."

     While Amy dressed, she issued her orders, and Jo obeyed
them, not without entering her protest, however, for she sighed
as she rustled into her new organdie, frowned darkly at herself
as she tied her bonnet strings in an irreproachable bow, wrest-
led viciously with pins as she put on her collar, wrinkled up
her features generally as she shook out the handkerchief, whose
embroidery was as irritating to her nose as the present mission
was to her feelings, and when she had squeezed her hands into
tight gloves with three buttons and a tassel, as the last touch
of elegance, she turned to Amy with an imbecile expression of
countenance, saying meekly . . .

     "I'm perfectly miserable, but if you consider me presentable,
I die happy."

     "You're highly satisfactory.  turn slowly round, and let me
get a careful view."  Jo revolved, and Amy gave a touch here and
there, then fell back, with her head on one side, observing gra-
ciously, "Yes, you'll do.  Your head is all I could ask, for that
white bonnet with the rose is quite ravishing.  Hold back your
shoulders, and carry your hands easily, no matter if your gloves
do pinch.  There's one thing you can do well, Jo, that is, wear a
shawl.  I can't, but it's very nice to see you, and I'm so glad
Aunt March gave you that lovely one.  It's simple, but handsome,
and those folds over the arm are really artistic. Is the point of
my mantle in the middle, and have I looped my dress evenly?  I like
to show my boots, for my feet are pretty, though my nose isn't."

     "You are a thing of beauty and a joy forever," said Jo, look-
ing through her hand with the air of a connoisseur at the blue feather
against the golden hair.  "Am I to drag my best dress through the
dust, or loop it up, please, ma'am?"

     "Hold it yup when you walk, but drop it in the house.  The
sweeping style suits you best, and you must learn to trail your
skirts gracefully.  You haven't half buttoned one cuff, do it at
once.  You'll never look finished if you are not careful about the
little details, for they make yup the pleasing whole."

     Jo sighed, and proceeded to burst the buttons off her glove,
in doing up her cuff, but at last both were ready, and sailed away,
looking as `pretty as picters', Hannah said, as she hung out of the
upper window to watch them.

     "Now, Jo dear, the Chesters consider themselves very elegant
people, so I want you to put on your best deportment.  Don't make
any of your abrupt remarks, or do anything odd, will you?  Just be
calm, cool, and quiet, that's safe and ladylike, and you can easily
do it for fifteen minutes," said Amy, as they approached the first
place, having borrowed the white parasol and been inspected by Meg,
with a baby on each arm.

     "Let me see.  `Calm, cool, and quiet', yes, I think I can
promise that.  I've played the part of a prim young lady on the
stage, and I'll try it off. My powers are great, as you shall see,
so be easy in your mind, my child."

     Amy looked relieved, but naughty Jo took her at her word, for
during the first call she sat with every limb gracefully composed,
every fold correctly draped, calm as a summer sea, cool as a snow-
bank, and as silent as the sphinx.  In vain Mrs. Chester alluded to
her `charming novel', and the Misses Chester introduced parties,
picnics, the opera, and the fashions.  Each and all were answered
by a smile, a bow, and a demure "Yes" or "No" with the chill on.  In
vain Amy telegraphed the word `talk', tried to draw her out, and
administered covert pokes with her foot.  Jo sat as if blandly uncon-
cious of it all, with deportment like Maud's face, `icily regular,
splendidly null'.

     "What a haughty, uninteresting creature that oldest Miss March
is!" was the unfortunately audible remark of one of the ladies, as
the door closed upon their guests.  Jo laughed noiselessly all
through the hall, but Amy looked disgusted at the failure of her
instructions, and very naturally laid the blame upon Jo.

     "How could you mistake me so?  I merely meant you to be properly
dignified and composed, and you made yourself a perfect stock and
stone.  Try to be sociable at the Lamb's'.  Gossip as other girls do,
and be interested in dress and flirtations and whatever nonsense
comes up.  They move in the best society, are valuable persons for
us to know, and I wouldn't fail to make a good impression there for
anything."

     "I'll be agreeable.  I'll gossip and giggle, and have horrors
and raptures over any trifle you like.  I rather enjoy this, and
now I'll imitate what is called `a charming girl'.  I can do it,
for I have May Chester as a model, and I'll improve upon her.  See
if the Lambs don't say, `What a lively, nice creature that Jo March
is!"

     Amy felt anxious, as well she might, for when Jo turned freak-
ish there was no knowing where she would stop.  Amy's face was a
study when she saw her sister skim into the next drawing room, kiss
all the young ladies with effusion, beam graciously upon the young
gentlemen, and join in the chat with a spirit which amazed the be-
holder.  Amy was taken possession of by Mrs. Lamb, with whom she
was a favorite, and forced to hear a long account of Lucretia's
last attack, while three delightful young gentlemen hovered near,
waiting for a pause when they might rush in and rescue her.  So
situated, she was powerless to check Jo, who seemed possessed by
a spirit of mischief, and talked away as volubly as the lady.  A
knot of heads gathered about her, and Amy strained her ears to hear
what was going on, for broken sentences filled her with curiosity,
and frequent peals of laughter made her wild to share the fun.  One
may imagine her suffering on overhearing fragments of this sort of
conversation.

     "She rides splendidly.  who taught her?"

     "No one.  She used to practice mounting, holding the reins, and
sitting straight on an old saddle in a tree.  Now she rides anything,
for she doesn't know what fear is, and the stableman lets her have
horses cheap because she trains them to carry ladies so well.  She
has such a passion for it, I often tell her if everything else fails,
she can be a horsebreaker, and get her living so."

     At this awful speech Amy contained herself with difficulty, for
the impression was being given that she was rather a fast young lady,
which was her especial aversion.  But what could she do?  For the
old lady was in the middle of her story, and long before it was done,
Jo was off again, make more droll revelations and committing still
more fearful blunders.

     "Yes, Amy was in despair that day, for all the good beasts were
gone, and of three left, one was lame, one blind, and the other so
balky that you had to put dirt in his mouth before he would start.
Nice animal for a pleasure party, wasn't it?"

     "Which did she choose?" asked one of the laughing gentlemen,
who enjoyed the subject.

     "None of them.  She heard of a young horse at the farm house
over the river, and though a lady had never ridden him, she re-
solved to try, because he was handsome and spirited.  Her struggles
were really pathetic.  There was no one to bring the horse to the
saddle, so she took the saddle to the horse.  My dear creature, she
actually rowed it over the river, put it on her head, and marched
up to the barn to the utter amazement of the old man!"

     "Did she ride the horse?'

     "Of course she did, and had a capital time.  I expected to see
her brought home in fragments, but she managed him perfectly, and
was the life of the party."

     "Well, I call that plucky!" And young Mr. Lamb turned an approv-
ing glance upon Amy, wondering what his mother could be saying to
make the girl look so red and uncomfortable.

     She was still redder and more uncomfortable a moment after,
when a sudden turn in the conversation introduced the subject of
dress.  One of the young ladies asked Jo where she got the pretty
drab hat she wore to the picnic and stupid Jo, instead of mention-
ing the place where it was bought two years ago, must needs answer
with unnecessary frankness, "Oh, Amy painted it.  You can't buy
those soft shades, so we paint ours any color we like.  It's a great
comfort to have an artistic sister."

     "Isn't that an original idea?" cried Miss Lamb, who found Jo
great fun.

     "That's nothing compared to some of her brilliant performances.
There's nothing the child can't do.  Why, she wanted a pair of blue
boots for Sallie's party, so she just painted her soiled white ones
the loveliest shade of sky blue you ever saw, and they looked exactly
like satin," added Jo, with an air of pride in her sister's accom-
plishments that exasperated Amy till she felt that it would be a relief
to throw her cardcase at her.

     "We read a story of yours the other day, and enjoyed it very
much," observed the elder Miss Lamb, wishing to compliment the lit-
erary lady, who did not look the character just then, it must be
confessed.

     Any mention of her `works' always had a bad effect upon Jo,
who either grew rigid and looked offended, or changed the subject
with a brusque remark, as now. "Sorry you could find nothing better
to read.  I write that rubbish because it sells, and ordinary people
like it.  Are you going to New York this winter?'

     As Miss Lamb had `enjoyed' the story, this speech was not
exactly grateful or complimentary.  The minute it was made Jo saw
her mistake, but fearing to make the matter worse, suddenly remem-
bered that it was for her to make the first move toward departure,
and did so with an abruptness that left three people with half-
finished sentences in their mouths.

     "Amy, we must go.  Good-by, dear, do come and see us.  We are
pining for a visit.  I don't dare to ask you, Mr. Lamb, but if you
should come, I don't think I shall have the heart to send you away."

     Jo said this with such a droll imitation of May Chester's
gushing style that Amy got out of the room as rapidly as poss-
ible, feeling a strong desire to laugh and cry at the same time.

     "Didn't I do well?" asked Jo, with a satisfied air as they
walked away.

     "Nothing could have been worse," was Amy's crushing reply.
"What possessed you to tell those stories about my saddle, and
the hats and boots, and all the rest of it?"

     "Why, it's funny, and amuses people.  They know we are
poor, so it's no use pretending that we have grooms, buy three
or four hats a season, and have things as easy and fine as they
do."

     "You needn't go and tell them all our little shifts, and
expose our; poverty in that perfectly unnecessary way.  You haven't
a bit of proper pride, and never will learn when to hold your
tongue and when to speak," said Amy despairingly.

     Poor Jo looked abashed, and silently chafed the end of her
nose with the stiff handkerchief, as if performing a penance for
her misdemeanors.

     "How shall I behave here?"  she asked, as they approached the
third mansion.

     "Just as you please.  I wash my hands of you," was Amy's short
answer.

     "Then I'll enjoy myself.  The boys are at home, and we'll have
a comfortable time.  Goodness knows I need a little change, for
elegance has a bad effect upon my constitution," returned Jo gruffly,
being disturbed by her failure to suit.

     An enthusiastic welcome from three big boys and several pretty
children speedily soothed her ruffled feelings, and leaving Amy to
entertain the hostess and Mr. Tudor, who happened to be calling
likewise, Jo devoted herself to the young folks and found the
change refreshing.  She listened to college stories with deep int-
erest, caressed pointers and poodles without a murmur, agreed
heartily that "Tom Brown was a brick," regardless of the improper
form of praise, and when one lad proposed a visit to his turtle tank,
she went with an alacrity which caused Mamma to smile upon her, as
that motherly lady settled the cap which was left in a ruinous con-
dition by filial hugs, bearlike but affectionate, and dearer to
her than the most faultless coiffure from the hands of an inspired
Frenchwoman.

     Leaving her sister to her own devices, Amy proceeded to enjoy
herself to her heart's content.  Mr. Tudor's uncle had married an
English lady who was third cousin to a living lord, and Amy regarded
the whole family with great respect, for in spite of her American
birth and breeding, she possessed that reverence for titles which
haunts the best of us--that unacknowledged loyalty to the early
faith in kings which set the most democratic nation under the sun
in ferment at the coming of a royal yellow-haired laddie, some years
ago, and which still has something to do with the love the young
country bears the old, like that of a big son for an imperious little
mother, who held him while she could, and let him go with a farewell
scolding when he rebelled.  But even the satisfaction of talking with
a distant connection of the British nobility did not render Amy for-
getful of time, and when the proper number of minutes had passed, she
reluctantly tore herself from this aristocratic society, and looked
about for Jo, fervently hoping that her incorrigible sister would not
be found in any position which should bring disgrace upon the name
of March.

     It might have been worse, but Amy considered it bad.  For Jo
sat on the grass, with an encampment of boys about her, and a dirty-
footed dog reposing on the skirt of her state and festival dress, as
she related one of Laurie's pranks to her admiring audience.  One
small child was poking turtles with Amy's cherished parasol, a sec-
ond was eating gingerbread over Jo's best bonnet, and a third playing
ball with her gloves.  but all were enjoying themselves, and when Jo
collected her damaged property to go, her escort accompanied her,
begging her to come again, "It was such fun to hear about Laurie's
larks."

     "Capital boys, aren't they?  I feel quite young and brisk again
after that." said Jo, strolling along with her hands behind her,
partly from habit, partly to conceal the bespattered parasol.

     "Why do you always avoid Mr. Tudor?" asked Amy, wisely refrain-
ing from any comment upon Jo's dilapidated appearance.

     "Don't like him, he puts on airs, snubs his sisters, worries
his father, a nd doesn't speak respectfully of his mother.  Laurie
says he is fast, and I don't consider him a desirable acquaintance,
so I let him alone."

     "You might treat him civilly, at least. You gave him a cool
nod, and just now you bowed and smiled in the politest way to
Tommy Chamberlain, whose father keeps a grocery store.  If you
had just reversed the nod and the bow, it would have been right,"
said Amy reprovingly.

     "No, it wouldn't," returned Jo, "I neither like, respect, nor
admire Tudor, though his grandfather's uncle's nephew's niece was
a third cousin to a lord.  Tommy is poor and bashful and good and
very clever.  I think well of him, and like to show that I do, for
he is a gentleman in spite of the brown paper parcels."

     "It's no use trying to argue with you," began Amy.

     "Not the least, my dear," interrupted Jo, "so let us look
amiable, and drop a card here, as the Kings are evidently out,
for which I'm deeply grateful."

     The family cardcase having done its duty the girls walked
on, and Jo uttered another thanksgiving on reaching the fifth
house, and being told that the young ladies were engaged.

     "now let us go home, and never mind Aunt March today.  We
can run down there any time, and it's really a pity to trail
through the dust in our best bibs and tuckers, when we are
tired and cross."

     "Speak for yourself, if you please.  Aunt March likes to have us
pay her the compliment of coming in style, and making a formal call.
It's a little thing to do, but it gives her pleasure, and I don't
believe it will hurt your things half so much as letting dirty dogs
and clumping boys spoil them.  Stoop down, and let me take the
crumbs off of your bonnet."

     "What a good girl you are, Amy!"  said Jo, with a repentant
glance from her own damaged costume to that of her sister, which
was fresh and spotless still.  "I wish it was as easy for me to do
little things to please people as it is for you.  I think of them,
but it takes too much time to do them, so I wait for a chance to
confer a great favor, and let the small ones slip, but they tell
best in the end, I fancy."

     Amy smiled and was mollified at once, saying with a maternal
air, "Women should learn to be agreeable, particularly poor ones,
for they have no other way of repaying the kindnesses they receive.
If you'd remember that, and practice it, you'd be better liked
than I am, because there is more of you."

     "I'm a crotchety old thing, and always shall be, but I'm
willing to own that you are right, only it's easier for me to
risk my life for a person than to be pleasant to him when I don't
feel like it.  It's a great misfortune to have such strong likes
and dislikes, isn't it?"

     "It's a greater not to be able to hide them.  I don't mind
saying that I don't approve of Tudor any more than you do, but I'm
not called upon to tell him so.  Neither are you, and there is no
use in making yourself disagreeable because he is."

     "But I think girls ought to show when they disapprove of
young men, and how can they do it except by their manners?
Preaching does not do any good, as I know to my sorrow, since I've
had Teddie to manage.  But there are many little ways in which I can
influence him without a word, and I say we ought to do it to others
if we can."

     "Teddy is a remarkable boy, and can't be taken as a sample
of other boys," said Amy, in a tone of solemn conviction, which
would have convulsed the `remarkable boy' if he had heard it. "If
we were belles, or women of wealth and position, we might do some-
thing, perhaps, but for us to frown at one set of young gentlemen
because we don't approve of them, and smile upon another set be-
cause we do, wouldn't have a particle of effect, and we should
only be considered odd and puritanical."

     "So we are to countenance things and people which we detest,
merely because we are not belles and millionaires, are we?  That's
a nice sort of morality."

     "I can't argue about it, I only know that it's the way of
the world, and people who set themselves against it only get
laughed at for their pains.  I don't like reformers, and I hope
you never try to be one."

     "I do like them, and I shall be one if I can, for in spite of
the laughing the world would never get on without them.  We can't
agree about that. for you belong to the old set, and I to the new.
You will get on the best, but I shall have the liveliest time of it.
I should rather enjoy the brickbats and hooting, I think."

     "Well, compose yourself now, and don't worry Aunt with your
new ideas."

     "I'll try not to, but I'm always possessed to burst out with
some particularly blunt speech or revolutionary sentiment before
her.  It's my doom, and I can't help it."

     They found Aunt Carrol with the old lady, both absorbed in
some very interesting subject, but they dropped it as the girls
came in, with a conscious look which betrayed that they had been
talking about their nieces.  Jo was not in a good humor, and the
perverse fit returned, but Amy, who had virtuously done her duty,
kept her temper and pleased everybody, was in a most angelic frame
of mind.  This amiable spirit was felt at once, and both aunts `my
deared' her affectionately, looking what they afterward said emphat-
ically, "That child improves every day."

     "Are you going to help about the fair, dear?" asked Mrs. Carrol,
as Amy sat down beside her with the confiding air elderly people like
so well in the young.

     "Yes, aunt.  Mrs. Chester asked me if I would, and I offered to
tend a table, as I have nothing but my time to give."

     "I'm not," put in Jo decidedly.  "I hate to be patronized, and
the Chesters think it's a great favor to allow us to help with their
highly connected fair.  I wonder you consented, Amy, they only want
you to work."

     "I am willing to work.  It's for the freedmen as well as the
Chesters, and I think it very kind of them to let me share the
labor and the fun.  Patronage does not trouble me when it is well
meant."

     "Quite right and proper.  I like your grateful spirit, my dear.
It's a pleasure to help people who appreciate our efforts.  Some do
not, and that is trying," observed Aunt March, looking over her
spectacles at Jo, who sat apart, rocking herself, with a somewhat
morose expression.

     If Jo had only known what a great happiness was wavering in
the balance for one of them, she would have turned dove-like in a
minute, but unfortunately, we don't have windows in our breasts,
and cannot see what goes on in the minds of our friends.  Better
for us that we cannot as a general thing, but now and then it
would be such a comfort, such a saving of time and temper.  By her
next speech, Jo deprived herself of several years of pleasure, and
received a timely lesson in the art of holding her tongue.

     "I don't like favors, they oppress and make me feel like a
slave.  I'd rather do everything for myself, and be perfectly
independent."

     "Ahem!" coughed Aunt Carrol softly, with a look at Aunt
March.

     "I told you so," said Aunt March, with a decided nod to Aunt
Carrol.

     Mercifully unconscious of what she had done, Jo sat with her
nose in the air, and a revolutionary aspect which  was anything but
inviting.

     "Do you speak French, dear?"  asked Mrs. Carrol, laying a
hand on Amy's.

     "Pretty well, thanks to Aunt March, who lets Esther talk to
me as often as I like," replied amy, with a grateful look, which
caused the old lady to smile affably.

     "How are you about languages?" asked Mrs. Carrol of JO.

     "Don't know a word.  I'm very stupid about studying anything,
can't bear French, it's such a slippery, silly sort of language,"
was the brusque reply.

     Another look passed between the ladies, and Aunt March said
to Amy, 'You are quite strong and well no, dear, I believe?  Eyes
don't trouble you any more, do they?"

     "Not at all, thank you, ma'am.  I'm very well, and mean to do
great things next winter, so that I may be ready for Rome, whenever
that joyful time arrives."

     "Good girl!  You deserve to go, and I'm sure you will some
day," said Aunt March, with an approving; pat on the head, as Amy
picked up her ball for her.

                     Crosspatch, draw the latch,
                     Sit by the fire and spin,

squalled Polly, bending down from his perch on the back of her
chair to peep into Jo's face, with such a comical air of imper-
tinent inquiry that it was impossible to help laughing.

     "Most observing bird," said the old lady.

     "Come and take a walk, my dear?" cried Polly, hopping toward
the china closet, with a look suggestive of a lump of sugar.

     "Thank you, I will.  Come Amy."  And Jo brought the visit to
an end, feeling more strongly than ever that calls did have a bad
effect upon her constitution.  She shook hands in a gentlemanly
manner, but Amy kissed both the aunts, and the girls departed,
leaving behind them the impression of shadow and sunshine, which
impression caused Aunt March to say, as they vanished . . .

     "You'd better do it, Mary.  I'll supply the money.  And Aunt
Carrol to reply decidedly, "I certainly will, if her father and
mother consent."

                  CHAPTER THIRTY

     Mrs. Chester's fair was so very elegant and select that it
was considered a great honor by the young ladies of the neigh-
borhood to be invited to take a table, and everyone was much
interest in the matter. Amy was asked, but Jo was not, which
was fortunate for all parties, as her elbows were decidedly
akimbo at this period of her life, and it took a good many hard
knocks to teach her how to get on easily.  The `haughty, unin-
teresting creature' was let severely alone, but Amy's talent and
taste were duly complimented by the offer of the art table, and
she exerted herself to prepare and secure appropriate and valu-
able contributions to it.

     Everything went on smoothly till the day before the fair
opened, then there occurred one of the little skirmishes which
it is almost impossible to avoid, when some five-and-twenty
women, old and young, with all their private piques and preju-
dices, try to work together.

     May Chester was rather jealous of Amy because the latter
was a greater favorite than herself, and just at this time
several trifling circumstances occurred to increase the feeling.
Amy's dainty pen-and-ink work entirely eclipsed May's painted
vases--that was one thorn.  Then the all conquering Tudor had
danced four times with Amy at a late party and only once with
May--that was thorn number two.  But the chief grievance that
rankled in her soul, and gave an excuse for her unfriendly con-
duct, was a rumor which some obliging gossip had whispered to
her, that the March girls had made fun of her at the Lambs'.
All the blame of this should have fallen upon Jo, for her
naughty imitation had been too lifelike to escape detection,
and the frolicsome Lambs had permitted the joke to escape. No
hint of this had reached the culprits, however, and Amy's dismay
can be imagined,when, the very evening before the fair, as she
was putting the last touches to her pretty table, Mrs. Chester,
who, of course, resented the supposed ridicule of her daughter,
said, in a bland tone, but with a cold look . . .

     "I find, dear, that there is some feeling among the young
ladies about my giving this table to anyone but my girls.  As
this is the most prominent, and some say the most attractive
table of all, and they are the chief getters-up of the fair, it
is thought best for them to take this place.  I'm sorry, but I
know you are too sincerely interested in the cause to mind a
little personal disappointment, and you shall have another table
if you like."

     Mrs. Chester fancied beforehand that it would be easy to
deliver this little speech, but when the time came, she found
it rather difficult to utter it naturally, with Amy's unsuspic-
ious eyes looking straight at her full of surprise and trouble.

     "Amy felt that there was something behind this, but would
not guess what, and said quietly, feeling hurt, and showing that
she did, "Perhaps you had rather I took no table at all?"

      "Now, my dear, don't have any ill feeling, I beg.  It's
merely a matter of expediency, you see, my girls will naturally
take the lead, and this table is considered their proper place.
I think it very appropriate to you, and feel very grateful for
your efforts to make it so pretty, but we must give up our pri-
vate wishes, of course, and I will see that you have a good place
elsewhere.  Wouldn't you like the flower table?  The little girls
undertook it, but they are discouraged.  You could make a charm-
ing thing of it, and the flower table is always attractive you
know."

     "Especially to gentlemen," added May, with a look which en-
lightened Amy as to one cause of her sudden fall from favor.  She
colored angrily, but took no other notice of that girlish sarcasm,
and answered with unexpected amiability . . .

     "It shall be as you please, Mrs. Chester.  I'll give up my
place here at once, and attend to the flowers, if you like."

     "You can put your own things on your own table, if you
prefer," began May, feeling a little conscience-stricken, as she
looked at the pretty racks, the painted shells, and quaint ill-
uminations Amy had so carefully made and so gracefully arranged.
She meant it kindly, but Amy mistook her meaning, and said quickly . ..

     "Oh, certainly, if they are in your way," and sweeping her
contributions into her apron, pell-mell, she walked off, feeling
that herself and her works of art had been insulted past forgive-
ness.

     "Now she's mad.  Oh, dear, I wish I hadn't asked you to speak,
Mama," said May, looking disconsolately at the empty spaces on her
table.

     "Girls' quarrels are soon over,"  returned her mother, feeling
a trifle ashamed of her own part in this one, as well she might.

     The little girls hailed Amy and her treasures with delight,
which cordial reception somewhat soothed her perturbed spirit, and
she fell to work, determined to succeed florally, if she could not
artistically.  But everything seemed against her.  It was late, and
she was tired.  Everyone was too busy with their own affairs to help
her, and the little girls were only hindrances, for the dears fussed
and chattered like so many magpies, making a great deal of confusion
in their artless efforts to preserve the most perfect order.  The
evergreen arch wouldn't stay firm after she got it up, but wiggled
and threatened to tumble down on her head when the hanging baskets
were filled. Her best tile got a splash of water, which left a sephia
tear on the Cupid's cheek.  She bruised her hands with hammering, and
got cold working in a draft, which last affliction filled her with
apprehensions for the morrow.  Any girl reader who has suffered like
afflictions will sympathize with poor Amy and wish her well through
her task.

     There was great indignation at home when she told her story
that evening.  Her mother said it was a shame, but told her she
had done right.  Beth declared she wouldn't go to the fair at all,
and Jo demanded why she didn't take all her pretty things and leave
those mean people to get on without her.

     "Because they are mean is no reason why i should be.  I hate
such things, and though I think I've a right to be hurt, I don't
intend to show it.  They will feel that more than angry speeches
or huffy actions, won't they, Marmee?"

     "That's the right spirit, my dear.  A kiss for a blow is always
best, though it's not very easy to give it sometimes," said her
mother, with the air of one who had learned the difference between
preaching and practicing.

     In spite of various very natural temptations to resent and
retaliate, Amy adhered to her resolution all the next day, bent
on conquering her enemy by kindness.  She began well, thanks to a
silent reminder that came to her unexpectedly, but most opportunely.
As she arranged her table that morning, while the little girls were
in the anteroom filling the baskets, she took up her pet production,
a little book, the antique cover of which her father had found among
his treasures, and in which on leaves of vellum she had beautifully
illuminated different texts.  As she turned the pages rich in dainty
devices with very pardonable pride, her eye fell upon one verse that
made her stop and think.  Framed in a brilliant scrollwork of scarlet,
blue and gold, with little spirits of good will helping one another
up and down among the thorns and flowers, were the words, "Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself."

     "I ought, but I don't," thought Amy, as her eye went from the
bright page to May's discontented face behind the big vases, that
could not hide the vacancies her pretty work had once filled.  Amy
stood a minute, turning the leaves in her hand, reading on each some
sweet rebuke for all heartburnings and uncharitableness of spirit.
Many wise and true sermons are preached us every day by unconscious
ministers in street, school, office, or home.  Even a fair table
may become a pulpit, if it can offer the good and helpful words
which are never out of season.  Amy's conscience preached her a
little sermon from that text, then and there, and she did what many
of us do not always do, took the sermon to heart, and straightway
put it in practice.

     A group of girls were standing about May's table, admiring
the pretty things, and talking over the change of saleswomen.  They
dropped their voices, but Amy knew they were speaking of her, hear-
ing one side of the story and judging accordingly.  It was not plea-
sant, but a better spirit had come over her, and presently a chance
offered for proving it.  She heard May say sorrowfully . . .

    "It's too bad, for there is no time to make other things, and
I don't want to fill up with odds and ends.  The table was just
complete then.  Now it's spoiled."

     "I dare say she'd put them back if you asked her," suggested
someone.

     "How could I after all the fuss?" began May, but she did not
finish, for Amy's voice came across the hall, saying pleasantly . . .

     "You may have them, and welcome, without asking, if you want
them.  I was just thinking I'd offer to put them back, for they
belong to your table rather than mine.  Here they are, please take
them, and forgive me if I was hasty in carrying them away last night."

     As she spoke, Amy returned her contribution, with a nod and a
smile, and hurried away again, feeling that it was easier to do a
friendly thing than it was to stay and be thanked for it.

     "Now, I call that lovely of her, don't you?" cried one girl.

     May's answer was inaudible, but another young lady, whose
temper was evidently a little soured by making lemonade, added,
with a disagreeable laugh, "Very lovely, for she knew she wouldn't
sell them at her own table."

     Now, that was hard.  When we make little sacrifices we like
to have them appreciated, at least, and for a minute Amy was sorry
she had done it, feeling that virtue was not always its won reward.
But it is, as she presently discovered, for her spirits began to
rise, and her table to blossom under her skillful hands, the girls
were very kind, and that one little act seemed to have cleared the
atmosphere amazingly.

     It was a very long day and a hard one for Amy, as she sat be-
hind her table, often quite alone, for the little girls deserted
very soon.  Few cared to buy flowers in summer, and her bouquets
began to droop long before night.

     The art table was the most attractive in the room.  There was
a crowd about it all day long, and the tenders were constantly fly-
ing to and fro with important faces and rattling money boxes.  Amy
often looked wistfully across, longing to be there, where she felt
at home and happy, instead of in a corner with nothing to do.  It
might seem no hardship to some of us, but to a pretty, blithe young
girl, it was not only tedious, but very trying, and the thought of
Laurie and his friends made it a real martyrdom.

     She did not go home till night, and then she looked so pale
and quiet that they knew the day had been a hard one, though she
made no complaint, and did not even tell what she had done.  Her
mother gave her an extra cordial cup of tea.  Beth helped her dress,
and made a charming little wreath for her hair, while Jo astonished
her family by getting herself up with unusual care, and hinting
darkly that the tables were about to be turned.

     "Don't do anything rude, pray Jo.  I won't have any fuss made,
so let it all pass and behave yourself," begged Amy, as she departed
early, hoping to find a reinforcement of flowers to refresh her poor
little table.

     "I merely intend to make myself entrancingly agreeable to ever
one I know, and to keep them in your corner as long as possible.
Teddy and his boys will lend a hand, and we'll have a good time
yet." returned Jo, leaning over the gate to watch for Laurie.  Pre-
sently the familiar tramp was heard in the dusk, and she ran out to
meet him.

     "Is that my boy?"

     "As sure as this is my girl!"  And Laurie tucked her hand under
his arm with the air of a man whose every wish was gratified.

     "Oh, teddy, such doings!"  And Jo told Amy's wrongs with sisterly
zeal.

     "A flock of our fellows are going to drive over by-and-by, and
I'll be hanged if I don't make them buy every flower she's got, and
camp down before her table afterward," said Laurie, espousing her
cause with warmth.

     "The flowers are not at all nice, Amy says, and the fresh ones
may not arrive in time.  I don't wish to be unjust or suspicious, but
I shouldn't wonder if they never came at all.  When people do one
mean thing they are very likely to do another," observed Jo in a
disgusted tone.

     "Didn't Hayes give you the best out of our gardens? I told
him to."

     "I didn't know that, he forgot, I suppose, and, as your grand-
pa was poorly, I didn't like to worry him by asking, though I did
want some."

     "Now, Jo, how could you think there was any need of asking?
They are just as much yours as mine.  Don't we always go halves in
everything?" began Laurie, in the tone that always made Jo turn
thorny.

     "Gracious, I hope not!  Half of some of your things wouldn't
suit me at all.  But we mustn't stand philandering here.  I've got
to help Amy, so you go and make yourself splendid, and if you'll
be so very kind as to let Hayes take a few nice flowers up to the
Hall, I'll bless you forever."

     "Couldn't you do it now?"  asked Laurie, so suggestively that
Jo shut the gate in his face with inhospitable haste, and called
through the bars, "Go away, Teddy, I'm busy."

     Thanks to the conspirators, the tables were turned that night,
for Hayes sent up a wilderness of flowers, with a loverly basket
arranged in his best manner for a centerpiece.  Then the March family
turned out en masse, and Jo exerted herself to some purpose, for
people not only came, but stayed, laughing at her nonsense, admiring
Amy's taste, and apparently enjoying themselves very much.  Laurie
and his friends gallantly threw themselves into the breach,bought
up the bouquets, encamped before the table, and made that corner
the liveliest spot in the room.  Amy was in her element now, and out
of gratitude, if nothing more, was as spritely and gracious as poss-
ible, coming to the conclusion, about that time, that virtue was
it's own reward, after all.

     Jo behaved herself with exemplary propriety, and when Amy was
happily surrounded by her guard of honor, Jo circulated about the
hall, picking up various bits of gossip, which enlightened her up-
on the subject of the Chester change of base.  She reproached herself
for her share of the ill feeling and resolved to exonerate Amy as
soon as possible.  She also discovered what Amy had done about the
things in the morning,and considered her a model of magnanimity. As
she passed the art table, she glanced over it for her sister's
things, but saw no sign of them.  "Tucked away out of sight, I dare
say," thought Jo, who could forgiver her own wrongs, but hotly re-
sented any insult offered her family.

     "Good evening, Miss Jo.  How does Amy get on?" asked May with
a conciliatory air, for she wanted to show that she also could be
generous.

     "She has sold everything she had that was worth selling, and
now she is enjoying herself.  The flower table is always attractive,
you know, `especially to gentlemen'."

     Jo couldn't resist giving that little slap, but May took it
so meekly she regretted it a minute after, and fell to praising
the great vases, which still remained unsold.

     "Is Amy's illumination anywhere about"  I took a fancy to
buy that for Father," said Jo, very anxious to learn the fate of
her sister's work.

     "Everything of Amy's sold long ago.  I took care that the
right people saw them, and they made a nice little sum of money
for us," returned May, who had overcome sundry small temptations,
as well as Amy had, that day.

     Much gratified, Jo rushed back to tell the good news, and
Amy looked both touched and surprised by the report of May's
word and manner.

    "Now, gentlemen, I want you to go and do your duty by the
other tables as generously as you have by mine, especially the
art table," she said, ordering out `Teddy's own', as the girls
called the college friends.

     "`Charge, Chester, charge!' is the motto for that table, but
do your duty like men, and you'll get your money's worth of art
in every sense of the word," said the irrepressible Jo, as the
devoted phalanx prepared to take the field.

     "To hear is to obey, but March is fairer far than May," said
little Parker, making a frantic effort to be both witty and tender,
and getting promptly quenched by Laurie, who said . . .

     "Very well, my son, for a small boy!" and walked him off, with
a paternal pat on the head.

     "Buy the vases," whispered Amy to Laurie, as a final heaping
of coals of fire on her enemy's head.

     To May's great delight, Mr. Laurence not only bought the vases,
but pervaded the hall with one under each arm.  The other gentlemen
speculated with equal rashness in all sorts of frail trifles, and
wandered helplessly about afterward, burdened with wax flowers,
painted fans, filigree portfolios, and other useful and approp-
riate purchases.

     Aunt Carrol was there, heard the story, looked pleased, and
said something to Mrs. March in a corner, which made the latter
lady beam with satisfaction, and watch Amy with a face full of
mingled pride and anxiety, though she did not betray the cause
of her pleasure till several days later.

     The fair was pronounced a success, and when May bade Amy
goodnight, she did not gush as usual, but gave her an affection-
ate kiss, and a look which said `forgive and forget'. That satis-
fied Amy, and when she got home she found the vases paraded on
the parlor chimney piece with a great bouquet in each.  "The
reward of merit for a magnanimous March," as Laurie announced
with a flourish.

     "You've a deal more principle and generosity and nobleness
of character than I ever gave you credit for, Amy.  You've be-
haved sweetly, and I respect you with all my heart," said Jo
warmly, as they brushed their hair together late that night.

     "Yes, we all do, and love her for being so ready to forgive.
It must have been dreadfully hard, after working so long and set-
ting your heart on selling your own pretty things. I don't believe
I could have done it as kindly as you did," added Beth from her
pillow.

     "Why, girls, you needn't praise me so.  I only did as I'd
be done by.  You laugh at me when I say I want to be a lady, but
I mean a true gentlewoman  in mind and manners, and I try to do
it as far as I know how.  I can't explain exactly, but I want to
be above the little meannesses and follies and faults that spoil
so many women.  I'm far from it now, but I do my best, and hope in
time to be what Mother is."

     Amy spoke earnestly, and Jo said, with a cordial hug, "I
understand now what you mean, and I'll never laugh at you again.
You are getting on faster than you think, and I'll take lessons
of you in true politeness, for you've learned the secret, I be-
lieve.  Try away, deary, you'll get your reward some day, and
no one will be more delighted than I shall."

     A week later Amy did get her reward, and poor Jo found it
hard to be delighted.  A letter came from Aunt Carrol, and Mrs.
March's face was illuminated to such a degree when she read it
that Jo and Beth, who were with her, demanded what the glad
tiding were.

     "Aunt Carrol is going abroad next month, and wants . . ."

     "Me to go with her!" burst in Jo, flying out of her chair
in an uncontrollable rapture.

     "No, dear, not you.  It's Amy."

     "Oh, Mother!  She's too young, it's my turn first.  I've
wanted it so long.  It would do me so much good, and be so alto-
gether splendid.  I must go!"

     "I'm afraid it's impossible, Jo.  Aunt says Amy, decidedly,
and it is not for us to dictate when she offers such a favor."

     "It's always so.  Amy has all the fun and I have all the work.
It isn't fair, oh, it isn't fair!" cried Jo passionately.

     "I'm afraid it's partly your own fault, dear.  When Aunt spoke
to me the other day, she regretted your blunt manners and too in-
dependent spirit, and here she writes, as if quoting something you
had said--`I planned at first to ask Jo, but as `favors burden her',
and she `hates French', I think I won't venture to invite her.  Amy
is more docile, will make a good companion for Flo, and receive
gratefully any help the trip may give her."

     "Oh, my tongue, my abominable tongue!  Why can't I learn to
keep it quiet?'  groaned Jo, remembering words which had been
her undoing.  When she had heard the explanation of the quoted
phrases, Mrs. March said sorrowfully . . .

     "I wish you could have gone, but there is no hope of it this
time, so try to bear it cheerfully, and don't sadden Amy's plea-
sure by reproaches or regrets."

     "I'll try," said Jo, winking hard as she knelt down to pick
up the basket she had joyfully upset.  "I'll take a leaf out of
her book, and try not only to seem glad, but to be so, and not
grudge her one minute of happiness.  But it won't be easy, for
it is a dreadful disappointment."  And poor Jo bedewed the little
fat pincushion she held with several very bitter tears.

     "Jo, dear, I'm very selfish, but I couldn't spare you, and
I'm glad you are not going quite yet," whispered Beth, embracing
her, basket and all, with such a clinging touch and loving face
that Jo felt comforted in spite of the sharp regret that made her
want to box her own ears, and humbly beg Aunt Carrol to burden
her with this favor, and see how gratefully she would bear it.

     By the time Amy came in, Jo was able to take her part in
the family jubilation, not quite as heartily as usual, perhaps,
but without repinings at Amy's good fortune.  The young lady
herself received the news as tidings of great joy, went about
in a solemn sort of rapture, and began to sort her colors and
pack her pencils that evening, leaving such trifles as clothes,
money, and passports to those less absorbed in visions of art
than herself.

     "It isn't a mere pleasure trip to me, girls," she said im-
pressively, as she scraped her best palette.  "It will decide my
career, for if I have any genius, I shall find it out in Rome,
and will do something to prove it."

     "Suppose you haven't?" said Jo, sewing away, with red eyes,
at the new collars which were to be handed over to Amy.

     "Then I shall come home and teach drawing for my living,"
replied the aspirant for fame, with philosophic composure.  But
she made a wry face at the prospect, and scratched away at her
palette as if bent on vigorous measures before she gave up her
hopes.

     "No, you won't.  You hate hard work, and you'll marry some
rich man, and come home to sit in the lap of luxury all your
days," said Jo.

     "Your predictions sometimes come to pass, but I don't be-
lieve that one will.  I'm sure I wish it would, for if I can't be
an artist myself, I should like to be able to help those who are,"
said Amy, smiling, as if the part of Lady Bountiful would suit
her better than that of a poor drawing teacher.

     "Hum!" said Jo, with a sigh.  "If you wish it you'll have it,
for your wishes are always granted--mine never."

     "Would you like to go?" asked Amy, thoughtfully patting her
nose with her knife.

     "Rather!"

     "Well, in a year or two I'll send for you, and we'll dig in
the Forum for relics, and carry out all the plans we've made so
many times."

     "Thank you.  I'll remind you of your promise when that joyful
day comes, if it ever does," returned Jo, accepting the vague but
magnificent offer as gratefully as she could.

     "There was not much time for preparation, and the house was
in a ferment till Amy was off.  Jo bore up very well till the
last flutter of blue ribbon vanished, when she retired to her
refuge, the garret, and cried till she couldn't cry any more.
Amy likewise bore up stoutly till the steamer sailed.  Then
just as the gangway was about to be withdrawn, it suddenly came
over her that a whole ocean was soon to roll between her and
those who loved her best, and she clung to Laurie, the last
lingerer, saying with a sob . . .

     "Oh, take care of them for me, and if anything should
happen. . . "

     "I will, dear, I will, and if anything happens, I'll come
and comfort you," whispered Laurie, little dreaming that he would
be called upon to keep his word.

     So Amy sailed away to find the Old World, which is always
new and beautiful to young eyes, while her father and friend
watched her from the shore, fervently hoping that none but gentle
fortunes would befall the happy-hearted girl, who waved her hand
to them till they could see nothing but the summer sunshine daz-
zling on the sea.

               CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

                                                  London

Dearest People,
     Here I really sit at a front window of the Bath Hotel,
Piccadilly.  It's not a fashionable place, but Uncle stopped
here years ago, and won't go anywhere else.  However, we don't
mean to stay long, so it's no great matter.  Oh, I can't begin
to tell you how I enjoy it all!  I never can, so I'll only give
you bits out of my notebook, for I've done nothing but sketch
and scribble since I started.

     I sent a line from Halifax, when I felt pretty miserable,
but after that I got on delightfully, seldom ill, on deck all
day, with plenty of pleasant people to amuse me.  Everyone was
very kind to me, especially the officers.  Don't laugh, Jo, gent-
lemen really are very necessary aboard ship, to hold on to, or to
wait upon one, and as they have nothing to do, it's a mercy to
make them useful, otherwise they would smoke themselves to death,
I'm afraid.

     Aunt and Flo were poorly all the way, and liked to be let
alone, so when I had done what I could for them, I went and
enjoyed myself.  Such walks on deck, such sunsets, such splendid
air and waves!  It was almost as exciting as riding a fast horse,
when we went rushing on so grandly.  I wish Beth could have come,
it would have done her so much good.  As for Jo, she would have
gone up and sat on the maintop jib, or whatever the high thing
is called, made friends with the engineers, and tooted on the
captain's speaking trumpet, she'd have been in such a state of
rapture.

     It was all heavenly, but I was glad to see the Irish coast,
and found it very lovely, so green and sunny, with brown cabins
here and there, ruins on some of the hills, and gentlemen's
countryseats in the valleys, with deer feeding in the parks.
It was early in the morning, but I didn't regret getting up to
see it, for the bay was full of little boats, the shore so pic-
turesque, and a rosy sky overhead.  I never shall forget it.

     At Queenstown on of my new acquaintances left us, Mr.
Lennox, and when I said something about the Lakes of Killarney,
he sighed and and, with a look at me . . .

         "Oh, have you e'er heard of Kate Kearney?
         She lives on the banks of Killarney;
         From the glance of her eye,
         Shun danger and fly,
         For fatal's the glance of Kate Kearney."

Wasn't that nonsensical?

     We only stopped at Liverpool a few hours.  It's a dirty,
noisy place, and I was glad to leave it.  Uncle rushed out and
bought a pair of dogskin gloves, some ugly, thick shoes, and an
umbrella, and got shaved `a la mutton chop, the first thing.
Then he flattered himself that he looked like a true Briton,
but the first time he had the mud cleaned off his shoes, the
little bootblack knew that an American stood in them, and said,
with a grin, "There yer har, sir.  I've given `em the latest
Yankee shine."  It amused Uncle immensely.  Oh, I must tell you
what that absurd Lennox did!  He got his friend Ward, who came
on with us, to order a bouquet for me, and the first thing I
saw in my room was a lovely one, with "Robert Lennox's compli-
ments," on the card.  Wasn't that fun, girls? I like traveling.

     I never shall get to London if I don't hurry.  The trip was
like riding through a long picture gallery, full of lovely land-
scapes.  The farmhouses were my delight, with thatched roofs,
ivy up to the eaves, latticed windows, and stout women with rosy
children at the doors.  The very cattle looked more tranquil
than ours, as they stood knee-deep in clover, and the hens had
a contented cluck, as if they never got nervous like Yankee
biddies.  Such perfect color I never saw, the grass so green, sky
so blue, grain so yellow, woods so dark, I was in a rapture all
the way.  So was Flo, and we kept bouncing from one side to the
other, trying to see everything while we were whisking along at
the rate of sixty miles an hour.  Aunt was tired and went to sleep,
but Uncle read his guidebook, and wouldn't be astonished at any-
thing.  This is the way we went on.  Amy, flying up--"Oh, that
must be Kenilworth, that gray place among the trees!"  Flo, dart-
ing to my window--"How sweet!  We must go there sometime, won't we
Papa?"  Uncle, calmly admiring his boots--"No, my dear, not unless
you want beer, that's a brewery."

     A pause--then Flo cried out, "Bless me, there's a gallows and
a man going up."  "Where, where?" shrieks Amy, staring out at two
tall posts with a crossbeam and some dangling chains.  "A colliery,"
remarks Uncle, with a twinkle of the eye.  "Here's a lovely flock
of lambs all lying down," says Amy.  "See, Papa, aren't they
pretty?"  added Flo sentimentally.  "Geese, young ladies," returns
Uncle, in a tone that keeps us quiet till Flo settles down to
enjoy the FLIRTATIONS OF CAPTAIN CAVENDISH, and I have the scenery
all to myself.

     Of course it rained when we got to London, and there was
nothing to be seen but fog and umbrellas.  We rested, unpacked,
and shopped a little between the showers.  Aunt Mary got me some
new things, for I came off in such a hurry I wasn't half ready.
A white hat and blue feather, a muslin dress to match, and the
loveliest mantle you ever saw.  Shopping in Regent Street is
perfectly splendid.  Things seem so cheap, nice ribbons only
sixpence a yard.  I laid in a stock, but shall get my gloves
in Paris.  Doesn't that sound sort of elegant and rich?

     Flo and I, for the fun of it, ordered a hansom cab, while
Aunt and Uncle were out, and went for a drive, though we learned
afterward that it wasn't the thing for young ladies to ride in
them alone.  It was so droll!  For when we were shut in by the
wooden apron, the man drove so fast that Flo was frightened, and
told me to stop him.  but he was up outside behind somewhere,
and I couldn't get at him.  He didn't hear me call, nor see me
flap my parasol in front, and there we were, quite helpless,
rattling away, and whirling around corners at a breakneck pace.
At last, in my despair, I saw a little door in the roof, and on
poking it open, a red eye appeared, and a beery voice said . . .

     "Now, then, mum?"

    I gave my order as soberly as I could, and slamming down
the door, with an "Aye, aye, mum," the man made his horse walk,
as if going to a funeral.  I poked again and said, "A little
faster," then off he went, helter-skelter as before, and we
resigned ourselves to our fate.

     Today was fair, and we went to Hyde Park, close by, for we
are more aristocratic than we look. The Duke of Devonshire lives
near.  I often see his footmen lounging at the back gate, and
the Duke of Wellington's house is not far off.  Such sights as I
saw, my dear!  It was as good as Punch, for there were fat dow-
agers rolling about in their red and yellow coaches, with gorgeous
Jeameses in silk stockings and velvet coats, up behind, and pow-
dered coachmen in front.  Smart maids, with the rosiest children
I ever saw, handsome girls, looking half asleep, dandies in queer
English hats and lavender kids lounging about, and tall soldiers,
in short red jackets and muffin caps stuck on one side, looking
so funny I longed to sketch them.

     Rotten Row means `Route de Roi', or the king's way, but
now it's more like a riding school than anything else.  The
horses are splendid, and the men, especially the grooms, ride
well, but the women are stiff, and bounce, which isn't accord-
ing to our rules.  I longed to show them a tearing American
gallop, for they trotted solemnly up and down, in their scant
habits and high hats, looking like the women in a toy Noah's
Ark.  Everyone rides--old men, stout ladies, little children--
and the young folks do a deal of flirting here, I say a pair
exchange rose buds, for it's the thing to wear one in the
button-hole, and I thought it rather a nice little idea.

     In the P.M. to Westminster Abbey, but don't expect me to
describe it, that's impossible, so I'll only say it was sublime!
This evening we are going to see Fechter, which will be an app-
ropriate end to the happiest day of my life.

     It's very late, but I can't let my letter go in the morn-
ing without telling you what happened last evening.  Who do
you think came in, as we were at tea?  Laurie's English friends,
Fred and Frank Vaughn!  I was so surprised, for I shouldn't have
known them but for the cards.  both are tall fellows with whisk-
ers, Fred handsome in the English style, and Frank much better,
for he only limps slightly, and uses no crutches. They had heard
from Laurie where we were to be, and came to ask us to their
house, but Uncle won't go, so we shall return the call, and see
them as we can.  They went to the theater with us, and we did
have such a good time, for Frank devoted himself to Flo, and
Fred and I talked over past, present, and future fun as if we
had know each other all our days.  Tell Beth Frank asked for her,
and was sorry to hear of her ill health.  Fred laughed when I
spoke of Jo, and sent his `respectful compliments to the big hat'.
Neither of them had forgotten Camp Laurence, or the fun we had
there.  What ages ago it seems, doesn't it?

     Aunt is tapping on the wall for the third time, so I must
stop.  I really feel like a dissipated London fine lady, writing
here so late, with my room full of pretty things, and my head
a jumble of parks, theaters, new gowns, and gallant creatures
who say "Ah!" and twirl their blond mustaches with the true
English lordliness.  I long to see you all, and in spite of my
nonsense am, as ever, your loving . . .
                                            AMY

PARIS

     Dear girls,

     In my last I told you about our London visit, how kind the
Vaughns were, and what pleasant parties they made for us.  I en-
joyed the trips to Hampton Court and the Kensington Museum more
than anything else, for at Hampton I saw Raphael's cartoons, and
at the Museum, rooms full of pictures by Turner, Lawrence, Rey-
nolds, Hogarth, and the other great creatures.  The day in Rich-
mond Park was charming, for we had a regular English picnic, and
I had more splendid oaks and groups of deer than I could copy,
also heard a nightingale, and saw larks go up.  We `did' London
to our heart's content, thanks to Fred and Frank, and were sorry
to go away, for though English people are slow to take you in,
when they once make up their minds to do it they cannot be out-
done in hospitality, I think.  The Vaughns hope to meet us in
Rome next winter, and I shall be dreadfully disappointed if they
don't, for Grace and I are great friends, and the boys very
nice fellows, especially Fred.

     Well, we were hardly settled here, when he turned up again,
saying he had come for a holiday, and was going to Switzerland.
Aunt looked sober at first, but he was so cool about it she
couldn't say a word.  And now we get on nicely, and are very
glad he came, for he speaks French like a native, and I don't
know what we should do without him.   Uncle doesn't know ten
words,  and insists on talking English very  loud, as if it
would  make people understand  him.  Aunt's pronunciation  is
old-fashioned, and Flo and I, though we flattered ourselves
that we knew a good deal, find we don't, and are very grateful
to have Fred do the `parley vooing', as Uncle calls it.

     Such delightful times as we are having!  Sight-seeing from
morning till night, stopping for nice lunches in the gay cafes,
and meeting with all sorts of droll adventures. Rainy days I
spend in the Louvre, revelling in pictures.  Jo would turn up
her naughty nose at some of the finest, because she has no
soul for art, but I have, and I'm cultivation eye and taste
as fast as I can.  She would like the relics of great people
better, for I've seen her Napoleon's cocked hat and gray
coat, his baby's cradle and his old toothbrush, also Marie
Antoinette's little shoe, the ring of Saint Denis, Charlemagne's
sword, and many other interesting things.  I'll talk for hours
about them when I come, but haven't time to write.

     The Palais Royale is a heavenly place, so full of bijouterie
and lovely things that I'm nearly distracted because I can't
buy them.  Fred wanted to get me some, but of course I didn't
allow it.  Then the Bois and Champs Elysees are tres magnifique.
I've seen the imperial family several times, the emperor an ugly,
hard-looking man, the empress pale and pretty, but dressed in
bad taste, I thought--purple dress, green hat, and yellow gloves.
Little Nap is a handsome boy, who sits chatting to his tutor,
and kissed his hand to the people as he passes in his four-horse
barouche, with postilions in red satin jackets and a mounted
guard before and behind.

     We often walk in the Tuileries Gardens, for they are
lovely, though the antique Luxembourg Gardens suit me better.
Pere la Chaise is very curious, for many of the tombs are
like small rooms, and looking in, one sees a table, with
images or pictures of the dead, and chairs for the mourners
to sit in when they come to lament.  That is so Frenchy.

     Our rooms are on the Rue de Rivoli, and sitting on the
balcony, we look up and down the long, brilliant street.  It
is so pleasant that we spend our evenings talking there when
too tired with our day's work to go out.  Fred is very enter-
taining, and is altogether the most agreeable young man I
ever knew--except Laurie, whose manners are more charming.  I
wish Fred was dark, for I don't fancy light men, however, the
Vaughns are very rich and come of an excellent family, so I
won't find fault with their yellow hair, as my own is yellower.

     Next week we are off to Germany and Switzerland, and as
we shall travel fast, I shall only be able to give you hasty
letters.  I keep my diary, and try to `remember correctly and
describe clearly all that I see and admire', as Father advised.
It is good practice for me, and with my sketchbook will give
you a better idea of my tour than these scribbles.

     Adieu, I embrace you tenderly.
                                           VOTRE AMIE

    HEIDELBERG

     My dear Mamma,

     Having a quiet hour before we leave for Berne, I'll try to
tell you what has happened, for some of it is very important,
as you will see.

     The sail up the Rhine was perfect, and I just sat and en-
joyed it with all my might.  Get Father's old guidebooks and
read about it.  I haven't words beautiful enough to describe it.
At Coblenz we had a lovely time, for some students from Bonn,
with whom Fred got acquainted on the boat, gave us a serenade.
It was a moonlight night, and about one o'clock Flo and I were
waked by the most delicious music under our windows.  We flew up,
and hid behind the curtains, but sly peeps showed us Fred and
the students singing away down below.  It was the most romantic
thing I ever saw--the river, the bridge of boats, the great fort-
ress opposite, moonlight everywhere, and music fit to melt a
heart of stone.

     When they were done we threw down some flowers, and saw
them scramble for them, kiss their hands to the invisible ladies,
and go laughing away, to smoke and drink beer, I suppose.  Next
morning Fred showed me one of the crumpled flowers in his vest
pocket, and looked very sentimental.  I laughed at him, and said
I didn't throw it, but Flo, which seemed to disgust him, for he
tossed it out of the window, and turned sensible again.  I'm
afraid I'm going to have trouble with that boy, it begins to
look like it.

     The baths at Nassau were very gay, so was Baden-Baden,
where Fred lost some money, and I scolded him.  He needs some-
one to look after him when Frank is not with him.  Kate said
once she hoped he'd marry soon, and I quite agree with her
that it would be well for him.  Frankfurt was delightful. I
saw Goeth's house, Schiller's statue, and Dannecker's famous
ARIADNE.  It was very lovely, but I should have enjoyed it
more if I had known the story better.  I didn't like to ask, as
everyone knew it or pretended they did.  I wish Jo would tell
me all about it.  I ought to have read more, for I find I don't
know anything, and it mortifies me.

     Now comes the serious part, for it happened here, and Fred
has just gone.  He has been so kind and jolly that we all got
quite fond of him.  I never thought of anything but a traveling
friendship till the serenade night.  Since then I've begun to
feel that the moonlight walks, balcony talks, and daily adven-
tures were something more to him than fun.  I haven't flirted,
Mother, truly, but remembered what you said to me, and have done
my very best.  I can't help it if people like me.  I don't try to
make them, and it worries me if I don't care for them, though Jo
says I haven't got any heart.  Now I know Mother will shake her
head, and the girls say, "Oh, the mercenary little wretch!", but
I've made up my mind, and if Fred asks me, I shall accept him,
though I'm not madly in love.  I like him, and we get on comfort-
ably together.  He is handsome, young, clever enough, and very
rich--ever so much richer than the Laurences.  I don't think his
family would object, and I should be very happy, for they are all
kind, well-bred, generous people, and they like me.  Fred, as the
eldest twin, will have the estate, I suppose, and such a splendid
one it is!  A city house in a fashionable street, not so showy
as our big houses, but twice as comfortable and full of solid
luxury, such as English people believe in.  I like it, for it's
genuine. I've seen the plate, the family jewels, the old servants,
and pictures of the country place, with its park, great house,
lovely grounds, and fine horses.  Oh, it would be all I should
ask!  And I'd rather have it than any title such as girls snap
up so readily, and find nothing behind.  I may be mercenary,
but I hate poverty, and don't mean to bear it a minute longer
than I can help.  One of us must marry well.  Meg didn't, Jo
won't, Beth can't yet, so I shall, and make everything okay all
round.  I wouldn't marry a man I hated or despised.  You may be
sure of that, and though Fred is not my model hero, he does very
well, and in time I should get fond enough of him if he was very
fond of me, and let me do just as I liked.  So I've been turning
the matter over in my mind the last week, for it was impossible to
help seeing that Fred liked me.  He said nothing, but little things
showed it.  He never goes with Flo, always gets on my side of the
carriage, table, or promenade, looks sentimental when we are alone,
and frowns at anyone else who ventures to speak tome.  Yesterday
at dinner, when an Austrian officer stared at us and then said
something to his friend, a rakish-looking baron, about `ein wond-
erschones Blondchen', Fred looked as fierce as a lion, and cut his
meat so savagely it nearly flew off his plate.  He isn't one of the
cool, stiff Englishmen, but is rather peppery, for he has Scotch
blood in him, as one might guess from his bonnie blue eyes.

     Well, last evening we went up to the castle about sunset, at
least all of us but Fred, who was to meet us there after going to
the Post Restante for letters.  We had a charming time poking
about the ruins, the vaults where the monster tun is, and the
beautiful gardens made by the elector long ago for his English
wife.  I liked the great terrace best, for the view was divine,
so while the rest went to see the rooms inside, I sat there trying
to sketch the gray stone lion's head on the wall, with scarlet
woodbine sprays hanging round it.  I felt as if I'd got into a
romance, sitting there, watching the Meckar rolling through the
valley, listening to the music of the Austrian band below, and
waiting for my lover, like a real storybook girl.  I had a feeling
that something was going to happen and I was ready for it.  I
didn't feel blushy or quakey, but quite cool and only a little
excited.

     By-and-by I heard Fred's voice, and then he came hurrying
through the great arch to find me.  He looked so troubled that I
forgot all about myself, and asked what the matter was.  He said
he'd just got a letter begging him to come home, for Frank was
very ill.  So he was going at once on the night train and only
had time to say good-by.  I was very sorry for him, and dis-
appointed for myself, but only for a minute because he said, as
he shook hands, and said it in a way that I could not mistake,
"I shall soon come back, you won't forget me, Amy?"

     I didn't promise, but I looked at him, and he seemed satis-
fied, and there was no time for anything but messages and good-
byes, for he was off in an hour, and we all miss him very much.
I know he wanted to speak, but I think, from something he once
hinted, that he had promised his father not to do anything of
the sort yet a while, for is is a rash boy, and the old gentle-
man dreads a foreign daughter-in-law.  We shall soon meet in
Rome, and then, if I don't change my mind, I'll say "Yes, thank
you," when he says "Will you, please?"

     Of course this is all very private, but I wished you to
know what was going on.  Don't be anxious about me, remember I
am your `prudent Amy', and be sure I will do nothing rashly.
Send me as much advice as you like.  I'll use it if I can.  I
wish I could see you for a good talk, Marmee.  Love and trust me.

     Ever your  AMY

                    CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

     "Jo, I'm anxious about Beth."

     "Why, Mother, she has seemed unusually well since the
babies came."

     "It's not her health that troubles me now, it's her spirits.
I'm sure there is something on her mind, and I want you to dis-
cover what it is."

     "What makes you think so, Mother?"

     "She sits alone a good deal, and doesn't talk to her father
as much as she used.  I found her crying over the babies the
other day.  When she sings, the songs are always sad ones, and
now and then I see a look in her face that I don't understand.
This isn't like Beth, and it worries me."

     "Have you asked her about it?'

     "I have tried once or twice, but she either evaded my
questions or looked so distressed that I stopped.  I never
force my children's confidence, and I seldom have to wait
for long."

     Mrs. March glanced at Jo as she spoke, but the face
opposite seemed quite unconscious of any secret disquiet-
ude but Beth's, and after sewing thoughtfully for a minute, Jo
said, "I think she is growing up, and so begins to dream dreams,
and have hopes and fears and fidgets, without knowing why or
being able to explain them.  Why, Mother, Beth's eighteen, but
we don't realize it, and treat her like a child, forgetting
she's a woman."

     "So she is.  Dear heart, how fast you do grow up," re-
turned her mother with a sigh and a smile.

     "Can't be helped, Marmee, so you must resign yourself to
all sorts of worries, and let your birds hop out of the nest,
one by one.  I promise never to hop very far, if that is any
comfort to you."

     "It's a great comfort, Jo.  I always feel strong when you
are at home, now Meg is gone.  Beth is too feeble and Amy too
young to depend upon, but when the tug comes, you are always
ready."

     "Why, you know I don't mind hard jobs much, and there
must always be one scrub in a family.  Amy is splendid in fine
works and I'm not, but I feel in my element when all the car-
pets are to be taken up, or half the family fall sick at once.
Amy is distinguishing herself abroad, but if anything is amiss
at home, I'm your man."

     "I leave Beth to your hands, then, for she will open her
tender little heart to her Jo sooner than to anyone else.  Be
very kind, and don't let her think anyone watches or talks
about; her.  If she only would get quite strong and cheerful
again, I shouldn't have a wish in the world."

     "Happy woman!  I've got heaps."

     "My dear, what are they?"

     "I'll settle Bethy's troubles, and then I'll tell you mine.
They are not very wearing, so they'll keep."  And Jo stitched away,
with a wise nod which set her mother's heart at rest about her for
the present at least.

     While apparently absorbed in her own affairs, Jo watched
Beth, and after many conflicting conjectures, finally settled
upon one which seemed to explain the change in her.  A slight
incident gave Jo the clue to the mystery, she thought, and
lively fancy, loving heart did the rest.  She was affecting
to write busily one Saturday afternoon, when she and Beth were
alone together.  Yet as she scribbled, she kept her eye on her
sister, who seemed unusually quiet.  Sitting at the window, Beth's
work often dropped into her lap, and she leaned her head upon her
hand, in a dejected attitude, while her eyes rested on the dull,
autumnal landscape.  Suddenly some one passed below, whistling
like an operatic blackbird, and a voice called out, "All serene!
Coming in tonight."

     Beth started, leaned forward, smiled and nodded, watched the
passer-by till his quick tramp died away, then said softly as if
to herself, "How strong and well and happy that dear boy looks."

     "Hum!" said Jo, still intent upon her sister's face, for the
bright color faded as quickly as it came, the smile vanished, and
presently a tear lay shining on the window ledge.  Beth whisked
it off, and in her half-averted face read a tender sorrow that
made her own eyes fill.  Fearing to betray herself, she slipped
away, murmuring something about needing more paper.

     "Mercy on me, Beth loves Laurie!" she said, sitting down in
her own room, pale with the shock of the discovery which she
believed she had just made.  "I never dreamed of such a thing.
What will Mother say?  I wonder if her . . ."  there Jo stopped
and turned scarlet with a sudden thought.  "If he shouldn't love
back again, how dreadful it would be.  He must.  I'll make him!"
And she shook her head threateningly at the picture of the mis-
chievous-looking boy laughing at her from the wall.  "Oh dear, we
are growing up with a vengeance.  Here's Meg married and a mamma,
Amy flourishing away at Paris, and Beth in love.  I'm the only
one that has sense enough to keep out of mischief."  Jo thought
intently for a minute with her eyes fixed on the picture, then
she smoothed out her wrinkled forehead and said, with a decided
nod at the face opposite,  "No thank you, sir, you're very
charming, but you've no more stability than a weathercock.  So
you needn't write touching notes and smile in that insinuating
way, for it won't do a bit of good, and I won't have it."

     Then she sighed, and fell into a reverie from which she
did not wake till the early twilight sent her down to take new
observations, which only confirmed her suspicion.  Though
Laurie flirted with Amy and joked with Jo, his manner to Beth
had always been peculiarly kind and gentle, but so was every-
body's.  Therefore, no one thought of imagining that he cared
more for her than for the others.  Indeed, a general impression
had prevailed in the family of late that `our boy' was getting
fonder than ever of Jo, who, however, wouldn't hear a word upon
the subject and scolded violently if anyone dared to suggest it.
If they had known the various tender passages which had been
nipped in the bud, they would have had the immense satisfaction
of saying, "I told you so."  But Jo hated `philandering', and
wouldn't allow it, always having a joke or a smile ready at the
least sign of impending danger.

     When Laurie first went to college, he fell in love about
once a month, but these small flames were as brief as ardent,
did no damage, and much amused Jo, who took great interest in
the alternations of hop, despair, and resignation, which were
confided to her in their weekly conferences.  But there came a
time when Laurie ceased to worship at many shrines, hinted
darkly at one all-absorbing passion, and indulged occasionally
in Byronic fits of gloom.  Then he avoided the tender subject
altogether, wrote philosophical notes to Jo, turned studious,
and gave out that he was going to `dig', intending to graduate
in a blaze of glory.  This suited the young lady better than
twilight confidences, tender pressures of the hand,, and
eloquent glances of the eye, for with Jo, brain developed
earlier than heart, and she preferred imaginary heroes to
real ones, because when tired of them, the former could be
shut up in the tin kitchen till called for, and the latter
were less manageable.

     Things were in this state when the grand discovery was
made, and Jo watched Laurie that night as she had never done
before.  If she had not got the new idea into her head, she
would have seen nothing unusual in the fact that Beth was
very quiet, and Laurie very kind to her.  But having given the
rein to her lively fancy, it galloped away with her at a great
pace, and common sense, being rather weakened by a long course
or romance writing, did not come to the rescue.  As usual Beth
lay on the sofa and Laurie sat in a low chair close by, amusing
her with all sorts of gossip, for she depended on her weekly
`spin', and he never disappointed her.  But that evening Jo
fancied that Beth's eyes rested on the lively, dark face
beside her with peculiar pleasure, and that she listened with
intense interest to an account of some exciting cricket match,
though the phrases, `caught off a tice', `stumped off his ground'',
and `the leg hit for three', were as intelligible to her as
Sanskrit.  She also fancied, having set her heart upon seeing it,
that she saw a certain increase of gentleness in  Laurie's manner,
that he dropped his voice now and then,  laughed less than usual,
was a little absent--minded, and settled the afghan over Beth's
feet with  an assiduity that was really almost tender.

      "Who knows?  Stranger  things have happened," thought Jo,
as she fussed  about the room.  "She will make  quite an angel
of  him, and he will make life delightfully easy and  pleasant
for the dear, if they only love  each other.  I  don't see how he
can help it,and I do believe he would if the rest of us were out of
the way."

    As everyone was out of the way but herself,   Jo began to
feel that she ought to dispose of herself with all speed.  But
where should she  go? And burning to lay herself upon the shrine
of sisterly  devotion, she sat down to settle that point.

     Now, the old sofa was a regular patriarch  of a sofa--long,
broad, well-cushioned, and low, a trifle shabby, as well it might
be, for the  girls had   slept  and sprawled on it as babies,
fished  over the back,  rode on  the arms, and  had menageries
under it  as children, and rested tired heads, dreamed  dreams,
and listened to tender talk  on it as young women. They all loved
it, for it was a family refuge, and one corner had always been
Jo's favorite lounging place.  Among the many pillows that adorned
the venerable couch was one, hard, round, covered with prickly
horsehair, and furnished with a knobby button at each end.  This
repulsive pillow was her especial property, being used as a weapon
of defense, a barricade, or a stern preventive of too much slumber.

     Laurie knew this pillow well, and had cause to regard it with
deep aversion, having been unmercifully pummeled with it in former
days when romping was allowed, and now frequently debarred by it
from the seat he most coveted next ot Jo in the sofa corner.  If
`the sausage' as the called it, stood on end, it was a sign that
he might approach and repose, but if it lay flat across the sofa,
woe to man, woman, or child who dared disturb it!  That evening
Jo forgot to barricade her corner, and had not been in her seat
five minutes, before a massive form appeared beside her, and with
both arms spread over the sofa back, both long legs stretched out
before him, Laurie exclaimed, with a sigh of satisfaction . . .

     "Now, this is filling at the price."

     "No slang," snapped Jo, slamming down the pillow.  But it was
too late, there was no room for it, and coasting onto the floor,
it disappeared in a most mysterious manner.

     "Come, Jo, don't be thorny.  After studying himself to a
skeleton all the week, a fellow deserves petting and ought to get
it."

     "Beth will pet you.  I'm busy."

     "No, she's not to be bothered with me, but you like that sort
of thing, unless you've suddenly lost your taste for it.  Have you?
Do you hate your boy, and want to fire pillows at him?"

     Anything more wheedlesome than that touching appeal was seldom
heard, but Jo quenched `her boy' by turning on him with a stern
query, "How many bouquets have you sent Miss Randal this week?"

     "Not one, upon my word.  She's engaged.  Now then."

     "I'm glad of it, that's one of your foolish extravagances,
sending flowers and things to girls for whom you don't care two
pins," continued Jo reprovingly.

     "Sensible girls for whom I do care whole papers of pins won't
let me send them `flowers and things', so what can I do?  My feel-
ings need a` vent'."

     "Mother doesn't approve of flirting even in fun, and you do
flirt desperately, Teddy."

     "I'd give anything if I could answer, `So do you'. As I can't,
I'll merely say that I don't see any harm in that pleasant little
game, if all parties understand that it's only play."

     "Well, it does look pleasant, but I can't learn how it's done.
I've tried, because one feels awkward in company not to do as
everybody else id doing, but I don't seem to get on", said Jo,
forgetting to play mentor.

     "Take lessons of Amy, she has a regular talent for it."

     "Yes, she does it very prettily, and never seems to go too
far.  I suppose it's natural to some people to please without
trying, and others to always say and do the wrong thing in the
wrong place."

     "I'm glad you can't flirt.  It's really refreshing to see a
sensible, straightforward girl, who can be jolly and kind without
making a fool of herself.  Between ourselves, Jo, some of the
girls I know really do go on at such a rate I'm ashamed of them.
They don't mean any harm, I'm sure, but if they knew how we
fellows talked about them afterward, they'd mend their ways, I
fancy."

     "They do the same, and as their tongues are the sharpest,
you fellows get the worst of it, for you are as silly as they,
every bit.  If you behaved properly, they would, but knowing
you like their nonsense, they keep it up, and then you blame
them."

     "Much you know about it, ma'am," said Laurie in a super-
ior tone.  "We don't like romps and flirts, though we may act
as if we did sometimes.  The pretty, modest girls are never
talked about, except respectfully, among gentleman.  Bless
your innocent soul!  If you could be in my place for a month
you'd see things that would astonish you a trifle.  Upon my
word, when I see one of those harum-scarum girls, I always
want to say with our friend Cock Robin . . .

                "Out upon you, fie upon you,
                 Bold-faced jig!"

     It was impossible to help laughing at the funny conflict
between Laurie's chivalrous reluctance to speak ill of woman-
kind, and his very natural dislike of the unfeminine folly of
which fashionable society showed him many samples.  Jo knew
that `young Laurence' was regarded as a most eligible parti
by worldly mamas, was much smiled upon by their daughters,
and flattered enough by ladies of all ages to make a cox-
comb of him, so she watched him rather jealously, fearing
he would be spoiled, and rejoiced more than she confessed
to find that he still believed in modest girls.  Returning
suddenly  to her admonitory tone, she said, dropping her
voice, "If you must have a `went', Teddy, go and devote
yourself to one of the `pretty, modest girls' whom you do
respect, and not waste your time with the silly ones."

     "You really advise it?"  And Laurie looked at her with
an odd mixture of anxiety and merriment in his face.

     "Yes, I do, but you'd better wait till you are through
college, on the whole, and be fitting yourself for the place
meantime.  You're not half good enough for--well, whoever
the modest girl may be."  And Jo looked a little queer like-
wise, for a name had almost escaped her.

     "That I'm not!" acquiesced Laurie, with an expression of
humility quite new to him, as he dropped his eyes and absently
wound Jo's apron tassel round his finger.

     "Mercy on us, this will never do," thought Jo, adding
aloud, "Go and sing to me.  I'm dying for some music, and
always like yours."

     "I'd rather stay here, thank you."

     "Well, you can't, there isn't room.  Go and make yourself
useful, since you are too big to be ornamental.  I thought you
hated to be tied to a woman's apron string?"  retorted Jo,
quoting certain rebellious words of his own.

     "Ah, that depends on who wears the apron!" and Laurie
gave an audacious tweak at the tassel.

     "Are you going?" demanded Jo, diving for the pillow.

     He fled at once, and the minute it was well, "Up with the
bonnets of bonnie Dundee," she slipped away to return no more
till the young gentleman departed in high dudgeon.

     Jo lay long awake that night, and was just dropping off
when the sound of a stifled sob made her fly to Beth's bed-
side, with the anxious inquiry, "What is it, dear?"

     "I thought you were asleep," sobbed Beth.

     "Is it the old pain, my precious?'

     "No, it's a new one, but I can bear it."  And Beth tried
to check her tears.

     "Tell me all about it, and let me cure it as I often did
the other."

     "You can't, there is no cure."  There Beth's voice gave
way, and clinging to her sister, she cried so despairingly
that Jo was frightened.

     "Where is it?  Shall I call Mother?"

     "No, no, don't call her, don't tell her.  I shall be
better soon.  Lie down here and `poor' my head.  I'll be
quiet and go to sleep, indeed I will."

     Jo obeyed, but as her hand went softly to and fro across
Beth's hot forehead and wet eyelids, her heart was very full
and she longed to speak.  But young as she was, Jo had learned
that hearts, like flowers, cannot be rudely handled, but must
open naturally, so though she believed she knew the cause of
Beth's new pain, she only said, in her tenderest tone, "Does
anything trouble you, deary?"

     "Yes, Jo," after a long pause.

     "Wouldn't it comfort you to tell me what it is?"

     "not now, not yet."

     "Then I won't ask, but remember, Bethy,that Mother and
Jo are always glad to hear and help you, if they can."

     "I know it.  I'll tell you by-and-by."

     "Is the pain better now?"

     "Oh, yes, much better, you are so comfortable, Jo."

     "Go to sleep, dear.  I'll stay with you."

     So cheek to cheek they fell asleep, and on the morrow
Beth seemed quite herself again, for at eighteen neither heads
nor hearts ache long, and a loving word can medicine most ills.

     But Jo had made up her mind, and after pondering over a
project for some days, she confided it to her mother.

     "You asked me the other day what my wishes were.  I'll
tell you one of them, Marmee," she began, as they sat along
together.  "I want to go away somewhere this winter for a
change."

     "Why, Jo?" And her mother looked up quickly, as if the
words suggested a double meaning.

     With her eyes on her work Jo answered soberly, "I want
something new.  I feel restless and anxious to be seeing,
doing, and learning more than I am.  I brood too much over
my own small affairs, and need stirring up, so as I can be
spared this winter, I'd like to hop a little way and try my
wings."

     "Where will you hop?"

     "To New York.  I had a bright idea yesterday, and this is
it.  You know Mrs. Kirke wrote to you for some respectable
young person to teach her children and sew.  It's rather hard
to find just the thing, but I think I should suit if I tried."

     "My dear, go out to service in that great boarding house!"
And Mrs. March looked surprised, but not displeased.

     "It's not exactly going out to service, for Mrs. Kirke is
your friend--the kindest soul that ever lived--and would make
things pleasant for me, I know.  Her family is separate from
the rest, and no one knows me there.  Don't care if they do.
It's honest work, and I'm not ashamed of it."

     "Nor I.  But your writing?"

     "All the better for the change.  I shall see and hear new
things, get new ideas, and even if I haven't much time there,
I shall bring home quantities of material for my rubbish."

     "I have no doubt of it, but are these your only reasons for
this sudden fancy?'

     "No, Mother."

     "May I know the others?"

     Jo looked up and Jo looked down, then said slowly, with
sudden color in her cheeks.  "It may be vain and wrong to
say it, but--I'm afraid--Laurie is getting too fond of me."

     "Then you don't care for him in the way it is evident he
begins to care for you?' And Mrs. March looked anxious as she
put the question.

     "Mercy, no!  I love the dear boy, as I always have, and
am immensely proud of him, but as for anything more, it's out
of the question."

     "I'm glad of that, Jo."

     "Why, please?'

     "Because, dear, I don't think you suited to one another.  As
friends you are very happy, and your frequent quarrels soon blow
over, but I fear you would both rebel if you were mated for life.
You are too much alike and too fond of freedom, not to mention
hot tempers and strong wills, to get on happily together, in a
relation which needs infinite patience and forbearance, as well
as love."

     "That's just the feeling I had, though I couldn't express it.
I'm glad you think he is only beginning to care for me.  It would
trouble me sadly to make him unhappy, for I couldn't fall in love
with the dear old fellow merely out of gratitude, could I?"

     "You are sure of his feeling for you?"

     The color deepened in Jo's cheeks as she answered, with
the look of mingled pleasure, pride, and pain which young
girls wear when speaking of first lovers, "I'm afraid it is
so, Mother.  He hasn't said anything, but he looks a great deal.
I think I had better go away before it comes to anything."

     "I agree with you, and if it can be managed you shall go."

     Jo looked relieved, and after a pause, said, smiling, "How
Mrs. Moffat would wonder at your want of management, if she
knew, and how she will rejoice that Annie may still hope."

     "AH, Jo, mothers may differ in their management, but the
hope is the same in all--the desire to see their children happy.
Meg is so, and I am content with her success.  You I leave to
enjoy your liberty till you tire of it, for only then will you
find that there is something sweeter.  Amy is my chief care
now, but her good sense will help ;her.  For Beth, I indulge
no hopes except that she may be well.  By the way, she seems
brighter this last day or two.  Have you spoken to her?'

     "Yes, she owned she had a trouble, and promised to tell
me by-and-by.  I said no more, for I think I know it,"  And
Jo told her little story.

     Mrs. March shook her head, and did not take so romantic
a view of the case, but looked grave, and repeated her opinion
that for Laurie's sake Jo should go away for a time.

     "Let us say nothing about it to him till the plan is settled,
then I'll run away before he can collect his wits and be tragic.
Beth must think I'm going to please myself, as I am, for I can't
talk about Laurie to her.  But she can pet and comfort him after
I'm gone, and so cure him of this romantic notion.  He's been
through so many little trials of the sort, he's used to it, and
will soon get over his lovelornity."

     Jo spoke hopefully, but could not rid herself of the fore-
boding fear that this `little trial' would be harder than the
others, and that Laurie would not get over his `lovelornity'
as easily as heretofore.

     The plan was talked over in a family council and agreed
upon, for Mrs. Kirke gladly accepted Jo, and promised to
make a pleasant home for her.  The teaching would render
her independent, and such leisure as she got might be made
profitable by writing, while the new scenes and society would
be both useful and agreeable.  Jo liked the prospect and was
eager to be gone, for the home nest was growing too narrow
for her restless nature and adventurous spirit.  When all was
settled, with fear and trembling she told Laurie, but to her
surprise he took it very quietly.  He had been graver than
usual of late, but very pleasant, and when jokingly accused
of turning over a new leaf, he answered soberly, "So I am,
and I mean this one shall stay turned."

     Jo was very much relieved that  one of his virtuous fits
should come on just then, and made her preparations with a
lightened heart, for Beth seemed more cheerful, and hoped
she  was doing the best for all.

      "One thing I leave in your especial care," she said, the
night before she left.

     "You mean your papers?" asked Beth.

     "No, my boy.  Be very good to him, won't you?"

     "Of course I will, but I can't fill your place, and he'll
miss you sadly."

     "It won't hurt him, so remember, I leave him in your
charge, to plague, pet, and keep in order."

     "I'll do my best, for your sake," promised Beth, wondering
why Jo looked at her so queerly.

     When Laurie said good-by, he whispered significantly, "It
won't do a bit of good, Jo.  My eye is on you, so mind what you
do, or I'll come and bring you home."

                   CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

                             New York, November

     Dear Marmee and Beth,

     I'm going to write you a regular volume, for I've got heaps
to tell, though I'm not a fine young lady traveling on the con-
tinent.  When I lost sight of Father's dear old face, I felt a
trifle blue, and might have shed a briny drop or two, if an
Irish lady with four small children, all crying more or less,
hadn't diverted my mind, for I amused myself by dropping ginger-
bread nuts over the seat every time they opened their mouths
to roar.

     Soon the sun came out, and taking it as a good omen, I
cleared up likewise and enjoyed my journey with all my heart.

     Mrs. Kirke welcomed me so kindly I felt at home at once,
even in that big house full of strangers.  She gave me a funny
little sky parlor--all she had, but there is a stove in it, and a
nice table in a sunny window, so I can sit here and write when-
ever I like.  A fine view and a church tower opposite atone for
the many stairs, and I took a fancy to my den on the spot.  The
nursery, where I am to teach and sew, is a pleasant room next
Mrs. Kirke's private parlor, and the two little girls are pretty
children, rather spoiled, I fancy, but they took to me after
telling them THE SEVEN BAD PIGS, and I've no doubt I shall make
a model governess.

     I am to have my meals with the children, if I prefer it to
the great table, and for the present I do, for I am bashful,
though no one will believe it.

     "Now, my dear, make yourself at home," said Mrs. K. in her
motherly way,  "I'm on the drive from morning to night, as you
may suppose with such a family, but a great anxiety will be off
my mind if I know the children are safe with you.  My rooms are
always open to you, and your own shall be as comfortable as I
can make it.  There are some pleasant people in the house if you
feel sociable, and your evenings are always free.  Come to me
if anything goes wrong, and be as happy as you can.  There's the
tea bell, I must run and change my cap."  And off she bustled,
leaving me to settle myself in my new nest.

     As I went downstairs soon after, I saw something I liked.
The flights are very long in this tall house, and as I stood
waiting at the head of the third one for a little servant girl
to lumber up, I saw a gentleman come along behind her, take the
heavy hod of coal out of her hand, carry it all the way up, put
it down at a door near by, and walk away, saying, with a kind
nod and a foreign accent, "It goes better so.  The little back
is too young to haf such heaviness."

     Wasn't it good of him?  I like such things, for as Father
says, trifles show character.  When I mentioned it to Mrs. K.,
that evening, she laughed, and said, "That must have been
Professor Bhaer, he's always doing things of that sort."

     Mrs. K. told me he was from Berlin, very learned and good,
but poor as a church mouse, and gives lessons to support himself
and two little orphan nephews whom he is educating here, accord-
ing to the wishes of his sister, who married an American.  Not
a very romantic story, but it interested me, and I was glad to
hear that Mrs. K. lends him her parlor for some of his scholars.
There is a glass door between it and the nursery, and I mean to
peep at him, and then I'll tell you how he looks.  He's almost
forty, so it's no harm, Marmee.

     After tea and a go-to-bed romp with the little girls, I
attacked the big workbasket, and had a quiet evening chatting
with my new friend.  I shall keep a journal-letter, and send it
once a week, so goodnight, and more tomorrow.

                                                 Tuesday Eve

     Had a lively time in my seminary this morning, for the
children acted like Sancho, and at one time I really thought I
should shake them all round. Some good angel inspired me to
try gymnastics,and I kept it up till they were glad to sit down
and keep still.  After luncheon, the girl took them out for a
walk, and I went to my needlework like little Mabel `with a
willing mind'.  I was thanking my stars that I'd learned to
make nice buttonholes, when the parlor door opened and shut,
and someone began to hum, KENNST DU DAS LAND, like a big bum-
blebee.  It was dreadfully improper, I know, but I couldn't
resist the temptation, and lifting one end of the curtain
before the glass door, I peeped in.  Professor Bhaer was there,
and while he arranged his books, I took a good look at him.  A
regular German--rather stout, with brown hair tumbled all over
his head, a bushy beard, good nose, the kindest eyes I ever
saw, and a splendid big voice that does one's ears good, after
our sharp or slipshod American gabble.  His clothes were rusty,
his hands were large, and he hadn't a really handsome feature
in his face, except his beautiful teeth, yet I liked him, for
he had a fine head, his linen was very nice, and he looked
like a gentleman, though two buttons were off his coat and
there was a patch on one shoe.  He looked sober in spite of
his humming, till he went to the window to turn the hyacinth
bulbs toward the sun, and stroke the cat, who received him
like an old friend.  Then he smiled, and when a tap came at
the door, called out in a loud, brisk tone, "Herein!"

     I was just going to run, when I caught sight of a morsel of
a child carrying a big book, and stopped, to see what was going
on.

     "Me wants me Bhaer," said the mite, slamming down her book
and running to meet him.

     "Thou shalt haf thy Bhaer.  Come, then, and take a goot
hug from him, my Tina," said the Professor, catching her up
with a laugh, and holding her so high over his head that she
had to stoop her little face to kiss him.

     "Now me mus tuddy my lessin," went on the funny little
thing.  So he put her up at the table, opened the great dic-
tionary she had brought, and gave her a paper and pencil, and
she scribbled away, turning a leaf now and then, and passing
her little fat finger down the page, as if finding a word,
so soberly that I nearly betrayed myself by a laugh, while
Mr. Bhaer stood stroking her pretty hair with a fatherly look
that made me think she must be his own, though she looked more
French than German.

     Another knock and the appearance of two young ladies sent
me back to my work, and there I virtuously remained through all
the noise and gabbling that went on next door.  One of the girls
kept laughing affectedly, and saying, "Now Professor," in a
coquettish tone, and the other pronounced her German with an
accent that must have made it hard for him to keep sober.

     Both seemed to try his patience sorely, for more than once
I heard him say emphatically, "No, no, it is not so, you haf
not attend to what I say,"" and once there was a loud rap, as
if he struck the table with his book, followed by the despair-
ing exclamation, ""Prut!  It all goes bad this day."

     Poor man, I pitied him, and when the girls were gone, took
just one more peep to see if he survived it.  He seemed to have
thrown himself back in his chair, tired out, and sat there with
his eyes shut till the clock struck two, when he jumped up, put
his books in his pocket, as if ready for another lesson, and
taking little Tina who had fallen asleep on the sofa in his
arms, he carried her quietly away.  I fancy he has a hard life
of it.  Mrs. Kirke asked me if I wouldn't go down to the five
o'clock dinner, and feeling a little bit homesick, I thought
I would, just to see what sort of people are under the same
roof with me.  So I made myself respectable and tried to slip
in behind Mrs. Kirke, but as she is short and I'm tall, my
efforts at concealment were rather a failure.  She gave me a
seat by her, and after my face cooled off, I plucked up cour-
age and looked about me.  The long table was full, and every--
one intent on getting their dinner, the gentlemen especially,
who seemed to be eating on time, for they bolted in every
sense of the word, vanishing as soon as they were done.  There
was the usual assortment of young men absorbed in themselves,
young couples absorbed in each other, married ladies in their
babies, and old gentlemen in politics. I don't think I shall
care to have much to do with any of them, except one sweet-
faced maiden lady, who looks as if she had something in her.

     Cast away at the very bottom of the table was the Pro-
fessor, shouting answers to the questions of a very inquisitive,
deaf old gentleman on one side, and talking philosophy with
a Frenchman on the other.  If Amy had been here, she'd have
turned her back on him forever because, sad to relate, he had
a great appetite, and shoveled in his dinner in a manner which
would have horrified `her ladyship'.  I didn't mind, for I like
`to see folks eat with a relish', as Hannah says, and the poor
man must have needed a deal of food after teaching idiots all
day.

     As I went upstairs after dinner, two of the young men
were settling their hats before the hall mirror, and I heard
one say low to the other, ""Who's the new party?""

     "Governess, or something of that sort."

     "What the deuce is she at our table for?"

     "Friend of the old lady's."

     "Handsome head, but no style."

     "Not a bit of it.  Give us a light and come on."

     I felt angry at first, and then I didn't care, for a gov-
erness is as good as a clerk, and I've got sense, if I haven't
style, which is more than some people have, judging from the
remarks of the elegant beings who clattered away, smoking like
bad chimneys.  I hate ordinary people!

                                                     Thursday

     Yesterday was a quiet day spent in teaching, sewing, and
writing in my little room, which is very cozy, with a light and
fire.  I picked up a few bits of news and was introduced to the
Professor.  It seems that Tina is the child of the Frenchwoman
who does the fine ironing in the laundry here.  The little thing
has lost her heart to Mr. Bhaer, and follows him about the house
like a dog whenever he is at home, which delights him, as he is
very fond of children, though a `bacheldore'.  Kitty and Minnie
Kirk likewise regard him with affection, and tell all sorts of
stories about the plays he invents, the presents he brings, and
the splendid tales he tells.  The younger men quiz him, it seems,
call him Old Fritz, Lager Beer, Ursa Major, and make all manner
of jokes on his name.  But he enjoys it like a boy, Mrs. Kirke
says, and takes it so good-naturedly that they all like him in
spite of his foreign ways.

     The maiden lady is a Miss Norton, rich, cultivated, and
kind.  She spoke to me at dinner today (for I went to table
again, it's such fun to watch people), and asked me to come
and see her at her room.  She has fine books and pictures,
knows interesting persons, and seems friendly, so I shall make
myself agreeable, for I do want to get into good society, only
it isn't the same sort that Amy likes.

     I was in our parlor last evening when Mr. Bhaer came in
with some newspapers for Mrs. Kirke.  She wasn't there, but
Minnie, who is a little old woman, introduced me very prettily.
"This is Mamma's friend, Miss March."

     "Yes, and she's jolly and we like her lots," added Kitty,
who is and `enfant terrible'.

     We both bowed, and then we laughed, for the prim intro-
duction and the blunt addition were rather a comical contrast.

     ""Ah, yes, I hear these naughty ones go to vex you, Mees
Marsch.  If so again, call at me and I come," he said, with a
threatening frown that delighted the little wretches.

     I promised I would, and he departed, but it seems as if I
was doomed to see a good deal of him, for today  as I passed
his door on my way out, by accident I knocked against it with
my umbrella.  It flew open, and there he stood in his dressing
gown, with a big blue sock on one hand and a darning needle
in the other.  He didn't seem at all ashamed of it, for when
I explained and hurried on, he waved his hand, sock and all,
saying in his loud, cheerful way . . .

     ""You haf a fine day to make your walk.  Bon voyage,
Mademoiselle.""

     I laughed all the way downstairs, but it was a little path-
etic, also to think of the poor man having to mend his own clothes.
The German gentlemen embroider, I know, but darning hose is
another thing and not so pretty.

     Nothing has happened to write about, except a call on Miss
Norton, who has a room full of pretty things, and who was very
charming, for she showed me all her treasures, and asked me if
I would  sometimes go with her to lectures and concerts, as her
escort, if I enjoyed them.  She put it as a favor, but I'm sure
Mrs. Kirke has told her about us, and she does it out of kind-
ness to me.  I'm as proud as Lucifer, but such favors from such
people don't burden me, and I accepted gratefully.

     When I got back to the nursery there was such an uproar
in the parlor that I looked in, and there was Mr. Bhaer down
on his hands and knees, with Tina on his back, Kitty leading
him with a jump rope, and Minnie feeding two small boys with
seedcakes, as they roared and ramped in  cages built of chairs.

     "We are playing nargerie,"" explained Kitty.

     "Dis is mine effalunt!"  added Tina, holding on by the
Professor's hair.

     "Mamma always allows us to do what we like Saturday aft-
ernoon,  when Franz and Emil come, doesn't she, Mr. Bhaer?"
said Minnie.

    The `effalunt' sat up, looking as much in earnest as any
of them, and said soberly to me, "I gif you my wort it is so,
if we make too large a noise you shall say Hush! to us, and we
go more softly."

     I promised to do so, but left the door open and enjoyed the
fun as much as they did, for a more glorious frolic I never wit-
nessed.  they played tag and soldiers, danced and sang, and when
it began to grow dark they all piled onto the sofa about the
Professor, while he told charming fairy stories of the storks
on the chimney tops, and the little `koblods', who ride the
snowflakes as they fall.  I wish Americans were as simple and
natural as Germans, don't you?

     I'm so fond of writing, I should go spinning on forever if
motives of economy didn't stop me, for though I've used thin
paper and written fine, I tremble to think of the stamps this
long letter will need.  Pray forward Amy's as soon as you can
spare them.  My small news will sound very flat after her
splendors, but you will like them, I know.  Is Teddy studying
so hard that he can't find time to write to his friends?  Take
good care of him for me, Beth, and tell me all about the babies,
and give heaps of love to everyone.  From your faithful Jo.

     P.S.  On reading over my letter, it strikes me as rather
Bhaery, but I am always interested in odd people, and I really
had nothing else to write about.  Bless you!

                                                   DECEMBER

     My Precious Betsey,

     As this is to be a scribble-scrabble letter, I direct it to
you, for it may amuse you, and give you some idea of my goings
on, for though quiet, they are rather amusing, for which, oh,
be joyful!  After what Amy would call Herculaneum efforts, in
the way of mental and moral agriculture, my young ideas begin
to shoot and my little twigs to bend as I could wish. They are
not so interesting tome as Tina and the boys, but I do my duty
by them, and they are fond of me.  Franz and Emil are jolly
little lads, quite after my own heart, for the mixture of
German and American spirit in the produces a constant state of
effervescence.  Saturday afternoons are riotous times, whether
spent in the house or out, for on pleasant days they all go to
walk, like a seminary, with the Professor and myself to keep
order, and then such fun!

     We are very good friends now, and I've begun to take
lessons.  I really couldn't help it, and it all came about in
such a droll way that I must tell you.  To begin at the begin-
ning, Mrs. Kirke called to me one day as I passed Mr. Bhaer's
room where she was rummaging.

     "Did you ever see such a den, my dear?  Just come and
help me put these books to rights, for I've turned everything
upside down, trying to discover what he has done with the six
new handkerchiefs I gave him not long ago."

     I went in, and while we worked I looked about me, for it
was `a den' to be sure.  Books and papers everywhere, a broken
meerschaum, and an old flute over the mantlepiece as if done
with, a ragged bird without any tail chirped on one window
seat, and a box of white mice adorned the other.  Half-finished
boats and bits of string lay among the manuscripts.  Dirty
little boots stood drying before the fire, and traces of the
dearly beloved boys, for whom he makes a slave of himself,
were to be seen all over the room.  After a grand rummage
three of the missing articles were found, one over the bird
cage, one covered with ink, and a third burned brown, having
been used as a holder.

     "Such a man!" laughed good-natured Mrs. K., as she put the
relics in the rag bay.  "I suppose the others are torn up to
rig ships, bandage cut fingers, or make kite tails.  It's
dreadful, but I can't scold him.  He's so absent-minded and good-
natured, he lets those boys ride over him roughshod.  I agreed
to do his washing and mending, but he forgets to give out his
things and I forget to look them over, so he comes to a sad pass
sometimes."

     "Let me mend them," said I.  "I don't mind it, and he needn't
know.  I'd like to, he's so kind to me about bringing my letters
and lending books."

     So I have got his things in order, and knit heels into two
pairs of the socks, for they were boggled out of shape with his
queer darns.  Nothing was said, and I hoped he wouldn't find it
out, but one day last week he caught me at it.  Hearing the
lessons he gives to others has interested and amused me so much
that I took a fancy to lear, for Tina runs in and out, leaving
the door open, and I can hear.  I had been sitting near this
door, finishing off the last sock, and trying to understand what
he said to a new scholar, who is as stupid as I am.  The girl
had gone, and I thought he had also, it was so still, and I was
busily gabbling over a verb, and rocking to and fro in a most
absurd way, when a little crow made me look up, and there was
Mr. Bhaer looking and laughing quietly, while he made signs to
Tina not to betray him.

     "So!" he said, as I stopped and stared like a goose, "you
peep at me, I peep at you, and this is not bad, but see, I am
not pleasanting when I say, haf you a wish for German?"

     "Yes, but you are too busy.  I am too stupid to learn," I
blundered out, as red as a peony.

     "Prut!  We will make the time, and we fail not to find the
sense.  At efening I shall gif a little lesson with much glad-
ness, for look you, Mees Marsch, I haf this debt to pay."  And
he pointed to my work  `Yes,' they say to one another, these so
kind ladies, `he is a stupid old fellow, he will see not what we
do, he will never observe that his sock heels go not in holes
any more, he will think his buttons grow out new when they fall,
and believe that strings make theirselves.' "Ah!  But I haf an
eye, and I see much.  I haf a heart, and I feel thanks for this.
Come, a little lesson then and now, or no more good fairy works
for me and mine."

     Of course I couldn't say anything after that, and as it
really is a splendid opportunity, I made the bargain, and we
began.  I took four lessons, and then I stuck fast in a gram-
matical bog.  The Professor was very patient with me, but it
must have been torment to him, and now and then he'd look at me
with such an expression of mild despair that it was a toss-up
with me whether to laugh or cry.  I tried both ways, and when
it came to a sniff or utter mortification and woe, he just
threw the grammar on to the floor and marched out of the room.
I felt myself disgraced and deserted forever, but didn't blame
him a particle, and was scrambling my papers together, meaning
to rush upstairs and shake myself hard, when in he came, as
brisk and beaming as if I'd covered myself in glory.

     "Now we shall try a new way. You and I will read these
pleasant little MARCHEN together, and dig no more in that dry
book, that goes in the corner for making us trouble."

     He spoke so kindly, and opened Hans Andersons's fairy
tales so invitingly before me, that I was  more ashamed than
ever, and went at my lesson in a neck-or-nothing style that
seemed to amuse him immensely.  I forgot my bashfulness, and
pegged away (no other word will express it) with all my might,
tumbling over long words, pronouncing according to inspiration
of the minute, and doing my very best.  When I finished reading
my first page, and stopped for breath, he clapped his hands and
cried out in his hearty way, "Das ist gut!'  Now we go well!  My
turn.  I do him in German, gif me your ear."  And away he went,
rumbling out the words with his strong voice and a relish which
was good to see as well as hear.  Fortunately the story was the
CONSTANT TIN SOLDIER, which is droll, you know, so I could laugh,
and I did, though I didn't understand half he read, for I couldn't
help it, he was so earnest, I so excited, and the whole thing so
comical.

     After that we got on better, and now I read my lessons
pretty well, for this way of studying suits me, and I can see
that the grammar gets tucked into the tales and poetry as one
gives pills in jelly.  I like it very much, and he doesn't seem
tired of it yet, which is very good of him, isn't it?  I mean
to give him something on Christmas, for I dare not offer money.
Tell me something nice, Marmee.

     I'm glad Laurie seems so happy and busy, that he has given
up smoking and lets his hair grow.  You see Beth manages him
better than I did.  I'm not jealous, dear, do your best, only
don't make a saint of him.  I'm afraid I couldn't like him
without a spice of human naughtiness.  Read him bits of my
letters.  I haven't time to write much, and that will do just
as well.  Thank Heaven Beth continues so comfortable.

                                                    JANUARY

     A Happy New Year to you all, my dearest family, which of
course includes Mr. L. and a young man by the name of Teddy.
I can't tell you how much I enjoyed your Christmas bundle,
for i didn't get it till night and had given up hoping. Your
letter came in the morning, but you said nothing about a
parcel, meaning it for a surprise, so I was disappointed,
for I'd had a `kind of feeling' that you wouldn't forget me.
I felt a little low in my mind as I sat up in my room after
tea, and when the big, muddy, battered-looking bundle was
brought to me, I just hugged it and pranced.  It was so
homey and refreshing that I sat down on the floor and read
and looked and ate and laughed and cried, in my usual absurd
way.  The things were just what I wanted, and all the better
for being made instead of bought.  Beth's new `ink bib' was
capital, and Hannah's box of hard gingerbread will be a
treasure.  I'll be sure and wear the nice flannels you sent,
Marmee, and read carefully the books Father has marked.  Thank
you all, heaps and heaps!

     Speaking of books reminds me that I'm getting rich in that
line, for on New Year's Day Mr. Bhaer gave me a fine Shakes-
peare.  It is one he values much, and I've often admired it,
set up in the place of honor with his German Bible, Plato,
Homer, and Milton, so you may imagine how I felt when he brought
it down, without its cover, and showed me my own name in it,
"from my friend Friedrich Bhaer".

     "You say often you wish a library.  Here I gif you one, for
between these lids (he meant covers) is many books in one.  Read
him well, and he will help you much, for the study of character
in this book will help you to read it in the world and paint it
with your pen."

     I thanked him as well as I could, and talk now about `my
library', as if I had a hundred books.  I never knew how much
there was in Shakespeare before, but then I never had a Bhaer
to explain it to me.  Now don't laugh at his horrid name.  It
isn't pronounced either Bear or Beer, as people will say it,
but something between the two, as only Germans can give it.
I'm glad you both like what I tell you about him, and hope you
will know him some day.  Mother would admire his warm heart,
Father his wise head.  I admire both, and feel rich in my new
`friend Friedrich Bhaer'.

     Not having much money, or knowing what he'd like, I got
several little things, and put them about the room, where he
would find them unexpectedly.  They were useful, pretty, or
funny, a new standish on his table, a little vase for his
flower, he always has one, or a bit of green in a glass, to
keep him fresh, he says, and a holder for his blower, so
that he needn't burn up what Amy calls `mouchoirs'.  I made
it like those Beth invented, a big butterfly with a fat body,
and black and yellow wings, worsted feelers, and bead eyes.
It took his fancy immensely, and he put it on his mantlepiece
as an article of virtue, so it was rather a failure after all.
Poor as he is, he didn't forget a servant or a child in the
house, and not a soul here, from the French laundrywoman to
Miss Norton forgot him.  I was so glad of that.

     They got up a masquerade, and had a gay time New Year's
Eve.  I didn't mean to go down, having no dress.  But at the
last minute, Mrs. Kirke remembered some old brocades, and Miss
Norton lent me lace and feathers.  So I dressed up as Mrs.
Malaprop, and sailed in with a mask on.  No one knew me, for I
disguised my voice, and no one dreamed of the silent, haughty
Miss March (for they think I am very stiff and cool, most of
them, and so I am to whippersnappers) could dance and dress,
and burst out into a `nice derangement of epitaphs, like an
allegory on the banks of the Nile'. I enjoyed it very much,
and when we unmasked it was fun to see them stare at me.  I
heard one of the young men tell another that he knew I'd been
an actress, in fact, he thought he remembered seeing me at
one of the minor theaters.  Meg will relish that joke.  Mr.
Bhaer was Nick Bottom, and Tina was Titania, a perfect little
fairy in his arms.  To see them dance was `quite a landscape',
to use a Teddyism.

     I had a very happy New Year, after all, and when I thought
it over in my room, I felt as if I was getting on a little in
spite of my many failures, for I'm cheerful all the time now,
work with a will, and take more interest in other people than
I used to, which is satisfactory.  Bless you all!  Ever your
loving . . . Jo

                    CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

     Though very happy in the social atmosphere about her, and
very busy with the daily work that earned her bread and made it
sweeter for the effort, Jo still found time for literary labors.
The purpose which now took possession of her was a natural one
to a poor and ambitious girl, but the means she took to gain
her end were not the best.  She saw that money conferred power,
therefore, she resolved to have, not to be used for herself alone,
but for those whom she loved more than life.

     The dream of filling home with comforts, giving Beth every-
thing she wanted,from strawberries in winter to an organ in her
bedroom, going abroad herself, and always having more than enough,
so that she might indulge in the luxury of charity, had been for
years Jo's most cherished castle in the air.

     The prize-story experience had seemed to open a way which
might, after long traveling and much uphill work, lead to this
delightful chateau en Espagne.  But the novel disaster quenched
her courage for a time, for public opinion is a giant which has
frightened stouter-hearted Jacks on bigger beanstalks than hers.
Like that immortal hero, she reposed awhile after the first
attempt, which resulted in a tumble and the least lovely of the
giant's treasures, if I remember rightly.  But the `up again
and take another' spirit was as strong in Jo as in Jack, so
she scrambled up on the shady side this time and got more
booty, but nearly left behind her what was far more precious
than the moneybags.

     She took to writing sensation stories, for in those dark
ages, even all-perfect America read rubbish.  She told no one,
but concocted a `thrilling tale', and boldly carried it her-
self to Mr. Dashwood, editor of the WEEKLY VOLCANO.  She had
never read SARTOR RESARTUS, but she had a womanly instinct
that clothes possess an influence more powerful over many
than the worth of character or the magic of manners.  So she
dressed herself in her best, and trying to persuade herself
that she was neither excited nor nervous, bravely climbed two
pairs of dark and dirty stairs to find herself in a disorderly
room, a cloud of cigar smoke, and the presence of three gen-
tlemen, sitting with their heels rather higher than their hats,
which articles of dress none of them took the trouble to remove
on her appearance.  somewhat daunted by this reception, Jo hes-
itated on the threshold, murmuring in much embarrassment . . .

     "Excuse me, I was looking for the WEEKLY VOLCANO office.
I wished to see Mr. Dashwood."

     Down went the highest pair of heels, up rose the smokiest
gentleman, and carefully cherishing his cigar between his
fingers, he advanced with a nod and a countenance expressive
of nothing but sleep.  Feeling that she must get through the
matter somehow, Jo produced her manuscript and, blushing
redder and redder with each sentence, blundered out fragments
of the little speech carefully prepared for the occasion.

     "A friend of mine desired me to offer--a story--just as
an experiment--would like your opinion--be glad to write more
if this suits."

     While she blushed and blundered, Mr. Dashwood had taken
the manuscript, and was turning over the leaves with a pair
of rather dirty fingers, and casting critical glances up and
down the neat pages.

     "Not a first attempt, I take it?"  observing that the
pages were numbered, covered only on one side, and not tied
up with a ribbon--sure sign of a novice.

     "No, sir.  She has had some experience, and got a prize
for a tale in the BLARNEYSTONE BANNER."

     "Oh, did she?"  And Mr. Dashwood gave JO a quick look,
which seemed to take note of everything she had on, from the
bow in her bonnet to the buttons on her boots.  "Well, you
can leave it, if you like.  We've more of this sort of thing
on hand than we know what to do with at present, but I'll run
my eye over it, and give you an answer next week."

     Now, Jo did not like to leave it, for Mr. Dashwood didn't
suit her at all, but, under the circumstances, there was nothing
for her to do but bow and walk away, looking particularly tall
and dignified, as she was apt to do when nettled or abashed.
Just then she was both, for it was perfectly evident from the
knowing glances exchanged among the gentlemen that her little
fiction of `my friend' was considered a good joke, and a
laugh, produced by some inaudible remark of the editor, as
he closed the door, completed her discomfiture.  Half re-
solving never to return, she went home, and worked off her
irritation by stitching pinafores vigorously, and in an
hour or two was cool enough to laugh over the scene and long
for next week.

     When she went again, Mr. Dashwood was alone, whereat she
rejoiced.  Mr. Dashwood was much wider awake than before,
which was agreeable and Mr. Dashwood was not too deeply ab-
sorbed in a cigar to remember his manners, so the second
interview was much more comfortable than the first.

     "We'll take this (editors never say I), if you don't
object to a few alterations.  It's too long, but omitting
the passages I've marked will make it just the right length,"
he said, in a businesslike tone.

     Jo hardly knew her own MS again, so crumpled and under-
scored were its pages and paragraphs, but feeling as a tender
patent might on being asked to cut off her baby's legs in
order that it might fit into a new cradle, she looked at the
marked passages and was surprised to find that all the moral
reflections--which she had carefully put in as ballast for
much romance--had been stricken out.

     "But, Sir, I thought every story should have some sort of
a moral, so I took care to have a few of my sinners repent."

     Mr. Dashwoods's editorial gravity relaxed into a smile, for
Jo had forgotten her `friend', and spoken as only an author
could.

     "People want to be amused, not preached at, you know. Morals
don't sell nowadays."  Which was not quite a correct statement,
by the way.

     "You think it would do with these alterations, then?"

     "Yes, it's a new plot, and pretty well worked up--language
good, and so on," was Mr. Dashwood's affable reply.

     "What do you--that is, what compensation--" began Jo, not
exactly knowing how to express herself.

     "Oh, yes, well, we give from twenty-five to thirty for
things of this sort.  Pay when it comes out," returned Mr. Dash-
wood, as if that point had escaped him.  Such trifles do escape
the editorial mind, it is said.

     "Very well, you can have it," said Jo, handing back the
story with a satisfied air, for after the dollar-a-column work,
even twenty-five seemed good pay.

     "Shall I tell my friend you will take another if she has one
better than this?" asked Jo, unconscious of her little slip of
the tongue, and emboldened by her success.

     "Well, we'll look at it.  Can't promise to take it.  Tell her
to make it short and spicy, and never mind the moral.  What name
would your friend like to put on it?" in a careless tone.

     "None at all, if you please, she doesn't wish her name to
appear and has no nom de plume," said Jo, blushing in spite of
herself.

     "Just as she likes, of course.  The tale will be out next week.
Will you call for the money, or shall I send it?" asked Mr. Dashwood,
who felt a natural desire to know who his new contributor might be.

     "I'll call.  Good morning, Sir."

     As she departed, Mr. Dashwood put up his feet, with the grace-
ful remark, "Poor and proud, as usual, but she'll do."

     Following Mr. Dashwood's directions, and making Mrs. Northbury
her model, Jo rashly took a plunge into the frothy sea of sensa-
tional literature, but thanks to the life preserver thrown her by
a friend, she came up again not much the worse for her ducking.

     Like most young scribblers, she went abroad for her charac-
ters and scenery, and banditti, counts, gypsies, nuns, and duch-
esses appeared upon her stage, and played their parts with as
much accuracy and spirit as could be expected.  Her readers
were not particular about such trifles as grammar, punctuation,
and probability, and Mr. Dashwood graciously permitted her to
fill his columns at the lowest prices, not thinking it necess-
ary to tell her that the real cause of his hospitality was the
fact that one of his hacks, on being offered higher wages, had
basely left him in the lurch.

     She soon became interested in her work, for her emaciated
purse grew stout, and the little hoard she was making to take
Beth to the mountains next summer grew slowly but surely as
the weeks passed.  One thing disturbed her satisfaction, and
that was that she did not tell them at home.  She had a feeling
that Father and Mother would not approve, and preferred to have
her own way first, and beg pardon afterward.  It was easy to
keep her secret, for no name appeared with her stories.  Mr.
Dashwood had of course found it out very soon, but promised
to be dumb, and for a wonder kept his word.

     She thought it would do her no harm, for she sincerely
meant to write nothing of which she would be ashamed, and
quieted all pricks of conscience by anticipations of the
happy minute when she should show her earnings and laugh over
her well-kept secret.

     But Mr. Dashwood rejected any but thrilling tales, and as
thrills could not be produced except by harrowing up the souls
of the readers, history and romance, land and sea, science and
art, police records and lunatic asylums, had to be ransacked
for the purpose.  Jo soon found that her innocent experience
had given her but few glimpses of the tragic world which
underlies society, so regarding it in a business light, she set
about supplying her deficiencies with characteristic energy.
Eager to find material for stories, and bent on making them
original in plot, if not masterly in execution, she searched
newspapers for accidents, incidents, and crimes.  She excited
the suspicions of public librarians by asking for works on
poisons.  She studied faces in the street, and characters,
good, bad, and indifferent, all about her.  She delved in
the dust of ancient times for facts or fictions so old that
they were as good as new, and introduced herself to folly, sin,
and misery, as well as her limited opportunities allowed.  She
thought she was prospering finely, but unconsciously she was
beginning to desecrate some of the womanliest attributes of a
woman's character.  She was living in bad society, and imagin-
ary though it was, its influence affected her, for she was
feeding heart and fancy on dangerous and unsubstantial food,
and was fast brushing the innocent bloom from her nature by
a premature acquaintance with the darker side of life, which
comes soon enough to all of us.

     She was beginning to feel rather than see this, for much
describing of other people's passions and feelings set her
to studying and speculating about her own. a morbid amusement
in which healthy young minds do not voluntarily indulge.  Wrong-
doing always brings its own punishment, and when Jo most
needed hers, she got it.

     I don't know whether the study of Shakespeare helped her
to read character, or the natural instinct of a woman for what
was honest, brave, and strong, but while endowing her imaginary
heroes with every perfection under the sun, Jo was discovering
a live hero, who interested her in spite of many human imper-
fections.  Mr. Bhaer, in one of their conversations, had advised
her to study simple, true, and lovely characters, wherever she
found them, as good training for a writer.  Jo took him at his
word, for she coolly turned round and studied him--a proceeding
which would have much surprised him, had he know it, for the
worthy Professor was very humble in his own conceit.

     Why everybody liked him was what puzzled Jo, at first.  He
was neither rich nor great, young nor handsome, in no respect
what is called fascinating, imposing, or brilliant, and yet
he was as attractive as a genial fire, and people seemed to
gather about him as naturally as about a warm hearth.  He was
poor, yet always appeared to be giving something away; a
stranger, yet everyone was his friend; no longer young, but
as happy-hearted as a boy; plain and peculiar, yet his face
looked beautiful to many, and his oddities were freely for-
given for his sake.  Jo often watched him, trying to discover
the charm, and at last decided that it was benevolence which
worked the miracle.  If he had any sorrow, `it sat with its
head under its wing', and he turned only his sunny side to the
world.  There were lines upon his forehead, but Time seemed
to have touched him gently, remembering how kind he was to
others.  The pleasant curves about his mouth were the mem-
orials of many friendly words and cheery laughs, his eyes
were never cold or hard, and his big hand had a warm, strong
grasp that was more expressive than words.

     His very clothes seemed to partake of the hospitable nature
of the wearer.  They looked as if they were at ease, and liked
to make him comfortable.  His capacious waistcoat was sugges-
tive of a large heart underneath.  His rusty coat had a social
air, and the baggy pockets plainly proved that little hands
often went in empty and came out full.  His very boots were
benevolent, and his collars never stiff and raspy like other
people's.

     "That's it!" said Jo to herself, when she at length dis-
covered that genuine good will toward one's fellow men could
beautify and dignify even a stout German teacher, who shoveled
in his dinner, darned his own socks, and was burdened with the
name of Bhaer.

     Jo valued goodness highly, but she also possessed a most
feminine respect for intellect, and a little discovery which
she made about the Professor added much to her regard for him.
He never spoke of himself, and no one ever knew that in his
native city he had been a man much honored and esteemed for
learning and integrity, till a countryman came to see him.
He never spoke of himself, and in a conversation with Miss
Norton divulged the pleasing fact. From her Jo learned it,
and liked it all the better because Mr. Bhaer had never told
it.  She felt proud to know that he was an honored Professor
in Berlin, though only a poor language-master in America,
and his homely, hard-working life was much beautified by the
spice of romance which this discovery gave it.

     Another and a better gift than intellect was shown her in
a most unexpected manner.  Miss Norton had the entree into
most society, which Jo would have had no chance of seeing but
for her.  The solitary woman felt an interest in the ambitious
girl, and kindly conferred many favors of this sort both on Jo
and the Professor.  She took them with her one night to a select
symposium, held in honor of several celebrities.

     Jo went prepared to bow down and adore the mighty ones
whom she had worshiped with youthful enthusiasm afar off. But
her reverence for genius received a severe shock that night,
and it took her some time to recover from the discovery that
the great creatures were only men and women after all.  Imagine
her dismay, on stealing a glance of timid admiration at the
poet whose lines suggested an ethereal being fed on `spirit,
fire, and dew', to behold him devouring his supper with an
ardor which flushed his intellectual countenance.  Turning
as from a fallen idol, she made other discoveries which
rapidly dispelled her romantic illusions.  The great novelist
vibrated between two decanters with the regularity of a pen-
dulum; the famous divine flirted openly with one of the
Madame de Staels of the age, who looked daggers at another
Corinne, who was amiably satirizing her, after outmaneuvering
her in efforts to absorb the profound philosopher, who imbibed
tea Johnsonianly and appeared to slumber, the loquacity of the
lady rendering speech impossible.  The scientific celebrities,
forgetting their mollusks and glacial periods, gossiped about
art, while devoting themselves to oysters and ices with char-
acteristic energy; the young musician, who was charming the
city like a second Orpheus, talked horses; and the specimen
of the British nobility present happened to be the most ordi-
nary man of the party.

     Before the evening was half over, Jo felt so completely
disillusioned, that she sat down in a corner to recover herself.
Mr. Bhaer soon joined her, looking rather out of his element,
and presently several of the philosophers, each mounted on his
hobby, came ambling up to hold an intellectual tournament in
the recess.  The conversations were miles beyond Jo's compre-
hension, but she enjoyed it, though Kant and Hegel were unknown
gods, the Subjective and Objective unintelligible terms, and
the only thing `evolved from her inner consciousness' was a
bad headache after it was all over.  It dawned upon her gradually
that the world was being picked to pieces, and put together on
new and, according to the talkers, on infinitely better princ-
iples than before, that religion was in a fair way to be
reasoned into nothingness, and intellect was to be the only
God.  Jo knew nothing about philosophy or metaphysics of any
sort, but a curious excitement, half pleasurable, half pain-
ful, came over her as she listened with a sense of being turned
adrift into time and space, like a young balloon out on a hol-
iday.

     She looked round to see how the Professor liked it, and
found him looking at her with the grimest expression she had
ever seen him wear.  He shook his head and beckoned her to
come away, but she was fascinated just then by the freedom
of Speculative Philosophy, and kept her seat, trying to find
out what the wise gentlemen intended  to rely upon after
they had annihilated all the old beliefs.

     Now, Mr. Bhaer was a diffident man and slow to offer his
own opinions, not because they were unsettled, but too sin-
cere and earnest to be lightly spoken.  As he glanced from Jo
to several other young people, attracted by the brilliancy
of the philosophic pyrotechnics,he knit his brows and longed
to speak, fearing that some inflammable young soul would be
led astray by the rockets, to find when the display was over
that they had only an empty stick or a scorched hand.

     He bore it as long as he could, but when he was appealed
to for an opinion, he blazed up with honest indignation and
defended religion with all the eloquence of truth--an elo-
quence which made his broken English musical and his plain
face beautiful.  He had a hard fight, for the wise men argued
well, but he didn't know when he was beaten and stood to his
colors like a man.  Somehow, as he talked, the world got
right again to Jo.  The old beliefs, that had lasted so long,
seemed better than the new.  God was not a blind force, and
immortality was not a pretty fable, but a blessed fact. She
felt as if she had solid ground under her feet again, and
when Mr. Bhaer paused, outtalked but not one whit convinced,
Jo wanted to clap her hands and thank him.

     She did neither, but she remembered the scene, and gave
the Professor her heartiest respect, for she knew it cost him
an effort to speak out then and there, because his conscience
would not let him be silent.  She began to see that character
is a better possession than money, rank, intellect, or beauty,
and to feel that if greatness is what a wise man has defined
it to be, `truth, reverence, and good will', then her friend
friedrich Bhaer was not only good, but great.

     This belief strengthened daily.  She valued his esteem,
she coveted his respect, she wanted to be worthy of his friend-
ship, and just when the wish was sincerest, she came near to
losing everything.  It all grew out of a cocked hat, for one
evening the Professor came in to give Jo her lesson with a
paper soldier cap on his head, which Tina had put there and
he had forgotten to take off.

     "It's evident he doesn't look in his glass before coming
down," thought Jo, with a smile, as he said "Goot efening,"
and sat soberly down, quite unconscious of the ludicrous
contrast between his subject and his headgear, for he was
going to read her the DEATH OF WALLENSTEIN.

     She said nothing at first, for she liked to hear him laugh
out his big, hearty laugh when anything funny happened, so she
left him to discover it for himself, and presently forgot all
about it, for to hear a German read Schiller is rather an ab-
sorbing occupation.  After the reading came the lesson, which
was a lively one, for Jo was in a gay mood that night, and
the cocked hat kept her eyes dancing with merriment.   The
Professor didn't know what to make of her, and stopped at
last to ask with an air of mild surprise that was irre-
sistible . . .

     "Mees Marsch, for what do you laugh in your master's
face?  Haf you no respect for me, that you go on so bad?"

     "How can I be respectful, Sir, when you forget to take
your hat off?" said Jo.

     Lifting his hand to his head, the absent-minded Professor
gravely felt and removed the little cocked hat, looked at it a
minute, and then threw back his head and laughed like a merry
bass viol.

     "Ah!  I see him now, it is that imp Tina who makes me a
fool with my cap.  Well,it is nothing, but see you, if this
lesson goes not well, you too shall wear him."

     But the lesson did not go at all for a few minutes be-
cause Mr. Bhaer caught sight of a picture on the hat, and
unfolding it, said with great disgust, "I wish these papers
did not come in the house.  They are not for children to see,
nor young people to read.  It is not well, and I haf no pat-
ience with those who make this harm."

     Jo glanced at the sheet and saw a pleasing illustration
composed of a lunatic, a corpse, a villian, and a viper. She
did not like it, but the impulse that made her turn it over
was not one of displeasure but fear, because for a minute
she fancied the paper was the VOLCANO.  It was not, however,
and her panic subsided as she remembered that even if it
had been and one of her own tales in it, there would have
been no name to betray her.  She had betrayed herself, how-
ever, by a look and a blush, for though an absent man, the
Professor saw a good deal more than people fancied.  He
knew that Jo wrote, and had met her down among the news-
paper offices more than once, but as she never spoke of it,
he asked no questions in spite of a strong desire to see her
work.  Now it occurred to him that she was doing what she
was ashamed to own, and it troubled him.  He did not say to
himself, "It is none of my business.  I've no right to say
anything," as many people would have done.  He only remem-
bered that she was young and poor, a girl far away from
mother's love and father's care, and he was moved to help
her with an impulse as quick and natural as that which
would prompt him to put out his hand to save a baby from
a puddle.  All this flashed through his mind in a minute,
but not a trace of it appeared in his face, and by the
time the paper was turned, and Jo's needle threaded, he
was ready to say quite naturally, but very gravely . . .

     "Yes, you are right to put it from you.  I do not think
that good young girls should see such things.  They are made
pleasant to some, but I would more rather give my boys gun-
powder to play with than this bad trash."

     "All may not be bad, only silly, you know, and if there
is a demand for it, I don't see any harm in supplying it.
Many very respectable people make an honest living out of
what are called sensation stories," said Jo, scratching
gathers so energetically that a row of little slits followed
her pin.

     "There is a demand for whisky, but I think you and I do
not care to sell it.  If the respectable people knew what harm
they did, they would not feel that the living was honest. They
haf no right to put poison in the sugarplum, and let the small
ones eat it.  No, they should think a little, and sweep mud in
the street before they do this thing."

     Mr. Bhaer spoke warmly, and walked to the fire, crumpling
the paper in his hands.  Jo sat still, looking as if the fire
had come to her, for her cheeks burned long after the cocked
hat had turned to smoke and gone harmlessly up the chimney.

     "I should like much to send all the rest after him," mut-
tered the Professor, coming back with a relieved air.

     Jo thought what a blaze her pile of papers upstairs would
make, and her hard-earned money lay rather heavily on her con-
science at that minute.  Then she thought consolingly to her-
self, "Mine are not like that, they are only silly, never
bad, so I won't be worried," and taking up her book, she said,
with a studious face, "Shall we go on, Sir?  I'll be very
good and proper now."

     "I shall hope so," was all he said, but he meant more than
she imagined, and the grave, kind look he gave her made her
feel as if the words WEEKLY VOLCANO were printed in large
type on her forehead.

     As soon as she went to her room, she got out her papers,
and carefully reread every one of her stories.  Being a little
shortsighted, Mr. Bhaer sometimes used eye glasses, and Jo
had tried them once, smiling to see how they magnified the
fine print of her book.  Now she seemed to have on the Pro-
fessor's mental or moral spectacles also, for the faults of
these poor stories glared at her dreadfully and filled her
with dismay.

     "They are trash, and will soon be worse trash if I go
on, for each is more sensational than the last.  I've gone
blindly on, hurting myself and other people, for the sake of
money.  I know it's so, for I can't read this stuff in sober
earnest without being horribly ashamed of it, and what should
I do if they were seen at home or Mr. Bhaer got hold of them?"

     Jo turned hot at the bare idea, and stuffed the whole bun-
dle into her stove, nearly setting the chimney afire with the
blaze.

     "Yes, that's the best place for such inflammable nonsense.
I'd better burn the house down, I suppose, than let other
people blow themselves up with my gunpowder," she thought as
she watched the DEMON OF THE JURA whisk away, a little black
cinder with fiery eyes.

     But when nothing remained of all her three month's work
except a heap of ashes and the money in her lap, Jo looked
sober, as she sat on the floor, wondering what she ought to
do about her wages.

     "I think I haven't done much harm yet, and may keep this
to pay for my time," she said, after a long meditation, adding
impatiently, "I almost wish I hadn't any conscience, it's so
inconvenient.  If I didn't care about doing right, and didn't
feel uncomfortable when doing wrong, I should get on capitally.
I can't help wishing sometimes, that Mother and Father hadn't
been so particular about such things."

     Ah, Jo, instead of wishing that, thank God that `Father
and Mother were particular'. and pity from your heart those
who have no such guardians to hedge them round with prin-
ciples which may seem like prison walls to impatient youth,
but which will prove sure foundations to build character upon
in womanhood.

     Jo wrote no more sensational stories, deciding that the
money did not pay for her share of the sensation, but going
to the other extreme, as is the way with people of her stamp,
she took a course of Mrs. Sherwood, Miss Edgeworth, and Han-
nah More, and then produced a tale which might have been
more properly called an essay or a sermon, so intensely moral
was it.  She had her doubts about it from the beginning, for
her lively fancy and girlish romance felt as ill at ease in the
new style as she would have done masquerading in the stiff
and cumbrous costume of the last century.  She sent this di-
dactic gem to several markets, but it found no purchaser,
and she was inclined to agree with Mr. Dashwood that morals
didn't sell.

     Then she tried a child's story, which she could easily have
disposed of if she had not been mercenary enough to demand filthy
lucre for it.  The only person who offered enough to make it
worth her while to try juvenile literature was a worthy gentle-
man who felt it his mission to convert all the world to his
particular belief.  But much as she liked to write for child-
ren, Jo could not consent to depict all her naughty boys as
being eaten by bears or tossed by mad bulls because they did
not go to a particular Sabbath school, nor all the good infants
who did go as rewarded by every kind of bliss, from gilded
gingerbread to escorts of angels when they departed this life
with psalms or sermons on their lisping tongues.  So nothing
came of these trials, land Jo corked up her inkstand, and
said in a fit of very wholesome humility . . .

     "I don't know anything.  I'll wait until I do before I try
again, and meantime, `sweep mud in the street' if I can't do
better, that's honest, at least."  Which decision proved that
her second tumble down the beanstalk had done her some good.

     While these internal revolutions were going on, her ex-
ternal life had been as busy and uneventful as usual, and if
she sometimes looked serious or a little sad no one observed
it but Professor Bhaer.  He did it so quietly that Jo never
knew he was watching to see if she would accept and profit by
his reproof, but she stood the test, and he was satisfied, for
though no words passed between them, he knew that she had
given up writing.  Not only did he guess it by the fact that
the second finger of her right hand was no longer inky, but
she spent her evenings downstairs now, was met no more among
newspaper offices, and studied with a dogged patience, which
assured him that she was bent on occupying her mind with
something useful, if not pleasant.

     He helped her in many ways, proving himself a true friend,
and Jo was happy, for while her pen lay idle, she was learning
other lessons besides German, and laying a foundation for the
sensation story of her own life.

     It was a pleasant winter and a long one, for she did not
leave Mrs. Kirke till June.  Everyone seemed sorry when the time
came.  The children were inconsolable, and Mr. Bhaer's hair
stuck straight up all over his head, for he always rumpled it
wildly when disturbed in mind.

     "Going home?  Ah, you are happy that you haf a home to go
in," he said, when she told him, and sat silently pulling his
beard in the corner, while she held a little levee on that last
evening.

     She was going early, so she bade them all goodbye overnight,
and when his turn came, she said warmly, "Now, Sir, you won't
forget to come and see us, if you ever travel our way, will you?
I'll never forgive you if you do, for I want them all to know my
friend."

     "Do you?  Shall I come?" he asked, looking down at her with
an eager expression which she did not see.

     "Yes, come next month.  Laurie graduates then, and you'd
enjoy commencement as something new."

     "That is your best friend, of whom you speak?" he said in
an altered tone.

     "Yes, my boy Teddy.  I'm very proud of him and should like
you to see him."

     Jo looked up then, quite unconscious of anything but her
own pleasure in the prospect of showing them to one another.
Something in Mr. Bhaer's face suddenly recalled the fact that
she might find Laurie more than a `best friend', and simply
because she particularly wished not to look as if anything was
the matter, she involuntarily began to blush, and the more she
tried not to, the redder she grew.  If it had not been for Tina
on her knee.  She didn't know what would have become of her.
Fortunately the child was moved to hug her, so she managed to
hide her face an instant, hoping the Professor did not see it.
But he did, and his own changed again from that momentary anx-
iety to its usual expression, as he said cordially . . .

     "I fear I shall not make the time for that, but I wish the
friend much success, and you all happiness.  Gott bless you!" And
with that, he shook hands warmly, shouldered Tina, and went away.

     But after the boys were abed, he sat long before his fire
with the tired look on his face and the `heimweh', or home-
sickness, lying heavy at his heart.  Once, when he remembered
Jo as she sat with the little child in her lap and that new
softness in her face, he leaned his head on his hands a minute,
and then roamed about the room, as if in search of something
that he could not find.

     "It is not for me, I must not hope it now," he said to him-
self, with a sigh that was almost a groan.  Then, as if reproach-
ing himself for the longing that he could not repress, he went
and kissed the two tousled heads upon the pillow, took down his
seldom-used meerschaum, and opened his Plato.

     He did his best and did it manfully, but I don't think he
found that a pair of rampant boys, a pipe, or even the divine
Plato, were very satisfactory substitutes for wife and child
at home.

     Early as it was, he was at the station next morning to see
Jo off, and thanks to him, she began her solitary journey with
the pleasant memory of a familiar face smiling its farewell, a
bunch of violets to keep her company, and best of all, the happy
thought, "Well, the winter's gone, and I've written no books,
earned no fortune, but I've made a friend worth having and I'll
try to keep him all my life."

                    CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

     Whatever his motive might have been, Laurie studied to
some purpose that year, for he graduated with honor, and
gave the Latin oration with the grace of a Phillips and the
eloquence of a Demosthenes, so his friends said.  They were
all there, his grandfather--oh, so proud--Mr. and Mrs. March,
John and Meg, Jo and Beth, and all exulted over him with the
sincere admiration which boys make light of at the time, but
fail to win from the world by any after-triumphs.

     "I've got to stay for this confounded supper, but I shall
be home early tomorrow.  You'll come and meet me as usual,
girls?" Laurie said, as he put the sisters into the carriage
after the joys of the day were over.  He said `girls', but he
meant Jo, for she was the only one who kept up the old custom.
She had not the heart to refuse her splendid, successful boy
anything, and answered warmly . . .

     "I'll come, Teddy, rain or shine, and march before you,
playing `Hail the conquering hero comes' on a jew's-harp."

     Laurie thanked her with a look that made her think in a
sudden panic, "Oh, deary me!  I know he'll say something, and
then what shall I do?"

     Evening meditation and morning work somewhat allayed her
fears, and having decided that she wouldn't be vain enough
to think people were going to propose when she had given them
every reason to know what her answer would be, she set forth
at the appointed time, hoping Teddy wouldn't do anything to
make her hurt his poor feelings.  A call at Meg's, and a
refreshing sniff and sip at the Daisy and Demijohn, still
further fortified her for the tete-a-tete, but when she saw
a stalwart figure looming in the distance, she had a strong
desire to turn about and run away.

     "Where's the jew's-harp, Jo?" cried Laurie, as soon as
he was within speaking distance.

     "I forgot it." And Jo took heart again, for that salutation
could not be called loverlike.

     She always used to take his arm on these occasions, now
she did not, and he made no complaint, which was a bad sign,
but talked on rapidly about all sorts of faraway subjects,
till they turned from the road into the little path that led
homeward through the grove.  Then he walked more slowly, sudd-
enly lost his fine flow of language, and now and then a dread-
ful pause occurred.  To rescue the conversation from one of
the wells of silence into which it kept falling, Jo said
hastily, "Now you must have a good long holiday!"

     "I intend to."

     Something in his resolute tone made Jo look up quickly to
find him looking down at her with an expression that assured
her the dreaded moment had come, and made her put out her hand
with an imploring, "No, Teddy.  Please don't!"

     "I will, and you must hear me.  It's no use, Jo, we've got
to have it out, and the sooner the better for both of us," he
answered, getting flushed and excited all at once.

     "Say what you like then.  I'll listen," said Jo, with a
desperate sort of patience.

     Laurie was a young lover, but he was in earnest, and meant
to `have it out', if he died in the attempt, so he plunged into
the subject with characteristic impetuousity, saying in a voice
that would get choky now and then, in spite of manful efforts to
keep it steady . ..

     "I've loved you ever since I've known you, Jo, couldn't help
it, you've been so good to me.  I've tried to show it, but you
wouldn't let me. Now I'm going to make you hear, and give me an
answer, for I can't go on so any longer."

     "I wanted to save you this.  I thought you'd understand . . .
began Jo, finding it a great deal harder than she expected.

     "I know you did, but the girls are so queer you never know
what they mean.  They say no when they mean yes, and drive a
man out of his wits just for the fun of it," returned Laurie,
entrenching himself behind an undeniable fact.

     "I don't. I never wanted to make you care for me so, and
I went away to keep you from it if I could."

     "I thought so.  It was like you, but it was no use.  I
only loved you all the more, and I worked hard to please you,
and I gave up billiards and everything you didn't like, and
waited and never complained, for I hoped you'd love me, though
I'm not half good enough . . ." Here there was a choke that
couldn't be controlled, so he decapitated buttercups while he
cleared his `confounded throat'.

     "You, you are, you're a great deal too good for me, and
I'm so grateful to you, and so proud and fond of you, I don't
know why I can't love you as you want me to.  I've tried, but
I can't change the feeling, and it would be a lie to say I do
when I don't."

     "Really, truly, Jo?"

     He stopped short, and caught both her hands as he put
his question with a look that she did not soon forget.

     "Really, truly, dear.""

     They were in the grove now, close by the stile, and when
the last words fell reluctantly from Jo's lips, Laurie dropped
her hands and turned as if to go on, but for once in his life
the fence was too much for him.  So he just laid his head down
on the mossy post, and stood so still that Jo was frightened.

     "Oh, Teddy, I'm sorry, so desperately sorry, I could kill
myself if it would do any good!  I wish you wouldn't take it
so hard, I can't help it.  You know it's impossible for people
to make themselves love other people if they don't," cried Jo
inelegantly but remorsefully, as she softly patted his shoul-
der, remembering the time when he had comforted her so long
ago.

     "They do sometimes," said a muffled voice from the post.

     "I don't believe it's the right sort of love, and I'd
rather not try it," was the decided answer.

     There was a long pause, while a blackbird sung blithely on
the willow by the river, and the tall grass rustled in the wind.
Presently Jo said very soberly, as she sat down on the step of
the stile, "Laurie, I want to tell you something."

     He started as if he had been shot, threw up his head, and
cried out in a fierce tone, "Don't tell me that, Jo, I can't bear
it now!"

     "Tell what?" she asked, wondering at his violence.

     "That you love that old man."

     "What old man?"  demanded Jo, thinking he must mean his
grandfather.

     "That devilish Professor you were always writing about.
If you say you love him, I know I shall do something desper-
ate." And he looked as if he would keep his word, as he clenched
his hands with a wrathful spark in his eyes.

     Jo wanted to laugh, but restrained herself and said warmly,
for she too, was getting excited with all this, "Don't swear,
Teddy!  He isn't old, nor anything bad, but good and kind, and
the best friend I've got, next to you.  Pray, don't fly into
a passion.  I want to be kind, but I know I shall get angry if
you abuse my Professor.  I haven't the least idea of loving
him or anybody else."

     "But you will after a while, and then what will become of
me?"

     "You'll love someone else too, like a sensible boy, and
forget all this trouble."

     "I can't love anyone else, and I'll never forget you, Jo,
Never! Never!"  with a stamp to emphasize his passionate words.

     "What shall I do with him?" sighed Jo, finding that emotions
were more unmanagable than she expected.  "You haven't heard
what I wanted to tell you.  Sit down and listen, for indeed I
want to do right and make you happy," she said, hoping to soothe
him with a little reason, which proved that she knew nothing
about love.

     Seeing a ray of hope in that last speech, Laurie threw him-
self down on the grass at her feet, leaned his arm on the lower
step of the stile, and looked up at her with an expectant face.
Now that arrangement was not conducive to calm speech or clear
thought on Jo's part, for how could she say hard things to her
boy while he watched her with eyes full of love and longing,
and lashes still wet with the bitter drop or two her hardness
of heart had wrung from him?  She gently turned his head away,
saying, as she stroked the wavy hair which had been allowed to
grow for her sake--how touching that was, to be sure!

     "I agree with Mother that you and I are not suited to each
other, because our quick tempers and strong wills would prob-
ably make us very miserable, if we were so foolish as to . . ."
Jo paused a little over the last word, but Laurie uttered it
with a rapturous expression.

     "Marry--no we shouldn't!  If you loved me, Jo, I should
be a perfect saint, for you could make me anything you like."

     "No, I can't.  I've tried and failed, and I won't risk
our happiness by such a serious experiment.  We don't agree and
we never shall, so we'll be good friends all our lives, but we
won't go and do anything rash."

     "Yes, we will if we get the chance," muttered Laurie re-
belliously.

     "Now do be reasonable, and take a sensible view of the
case," implored Jo, almost at her wit's end.

     "I won't be reasonable.  I don't want to take what you
call `a sensible view'. It won't help me, and it only makes
it harder.  I don't believe you've got any heart."

     "I wish I hadn't."

     There was a little quiver in Jo's voice, and thinking it a
good omen, Laurie turned round, bringing all his persuasive
powers to bear as he said, in the wheedlesome tone that had
never been so dangerously wheedlesome before, "Don't disappoint
us, dear!  Everyone expects it.  Grandpa has set his heart upon
it, your people like it, and I can't get on without you.  Say
you will, and let's be happy.  Do, do!"

     Not until months afterward did Jo understand how she had
the strength of mind to hold fast to the resolution she had
made when she decided that she did not love her boy, and
never could.  It was very hard to do, but she did it, knowing
that delay was both useless and cruel.

     "I can't say `yes' truly, so I won't say it at all.  You'll
see that I'm right, by-and-by, and thank me for it . . ." she
began solemnly.

     "I'll be hanged if I do!" And Laurie  bounced up off the
grass, burning with indignation at the very idea.

     "Yes, you will!" persisted Jo.  "You'll get over this after
a while, and find some lovely accomplished girl, who will adore
you, and make a fine mistress for your fine house.  I shouldn't.
I'm homely and awkward and odd and old, and you'd be ashamed
of me, and we should quarrel--we can't help it even now, you see--
and I shouldn't like elegant society and you would, and you'd
hate my scribbling, and I couldn't get on without it, and we
should be unhappy, and wish we hadn't done it, and everything
would be horrid!"

     "Anything more?" asked asked Laurie, finding it hard to
listen patiently to this prophetic burst.

     "Nothing more, except that I don't believe I shall ever
marry.  I'm happy as I am, and love my liberty too well to
be in a hurry to give it up for any mortal man."

     "I know better!" broke in Laurie.  "You think so now,
but there'll come a time when you will care for somebody, and
you'll love him tremendously, and live and die for him.  I
know you will, it's your way, and I shall have to stand by
and see it."  And the despairing lover cast his hat upon the
ground with a gesture that would have seemed comical, if his
face had not been so tragic.

     "Yes, I will live and die for him, if her ever comes and
makes me love him in spite of myself, and you must do the best
you can!" cried Jo, losing patience with poor Teddy.  "I've
done my best, but you won't be reasonable, and it's selfish
of you to keep teasing for what I can't give.  I shall always
be fond of you, very fond indeed, as a friend, but I'll never
marry you, and the sooner you believe it the better for both
of us--so now!"

     That speech was like gunpowder.  Laurie looked at her a
minute as if he did not quite know what to do with himself,
then turned sharply away, saying in a desperate sort of tone,
"You'll be sorry some day, Jo."

     "Oh, where are you going?" she cried, for his face fright-
ened her.

     "To the devil!" was the consoling answer.

     For a minute Jo's heart stood still, as he swung himself
down the bank toward the river, but it takes much folly, sin
or misery to send a young man to a violent death, and Laurie
was not one of the weak sort who are conquered by a single
failure.  He had no thought of a melodramatic plunge, but
some blind instinct led him to fling hat and coat into his boat,
and row away with all his might, making better time up the
river than he had done in any race.  Jo drew a long breath and
unclasped her hands as she watched the poor fellow trying to
outstrip the trouble which he carried in his heart.

     "That will do him good, and he'll come home in such a
tender, penitent state of mind, that I shan't dare to see him."
she said, adding, as she went slowly home, feeling as if she
had murdered some innocent thing, and buried it under the
leaves.  "Now I must go and prepare Mr. Laurence to be very
kind to my poor boy.  I wish he'd love Beth, perhaps he may
in time, but I begin to think I was mistaken about her.  Oh
dear!  How can girls like to have lovers and refuse them?  I
think it's dreadful."

     Being sure that no one could do it so well as herself, she
went straight to Mr. Laurence, told the hard story bravely
through, and then broke down, crying so dismally over her own
insensibility that the kind old gentleman, though sorely dis-
appointed, did not utter a reproach.  He found it difficult
to understand how any girl could help loving Laurie, and hoped
she would change her mind, but he knew even better than Jo
that love cannot be forced, so he shook his head sadly and
resolved to carry his boy out of harm's way, for Young Im-
petuosity's parting words to Jo disturbed him more than he
would confess.

     When Laurie came home, dead tired but quite composed, his
grandfather met him as if he knew nothing, and kept up the
delusion very successfully for an hour or two.  But when they
sat together in the twilight, the time they used to enjoy so
much, it was hard work for the old man to ramble on as usual,
and harder still for the young one to listen to praises of
the last year's success, which to him now seemed like love's
labor lost.  He bore it as long as he could, then went to
his piano and began to play.  The window's were open, and Jo,
walking in the garden with Beth, for once understood music
better than her sister, for he played the `SONATA PATHETIQUE',
and played it as he never did before.

     "That's very fine, I dare say, but it's sad enough to make
one cry.  Give us something gayer, lad," said Mr. Laurence,
whose kind old heart was full of sympathy, which he longed to
show but knew not how.

     Laurie dashed into a livelier strain, played stormily for
several minutes, and would have got through bravely, if in a
momentary lull Mrs. March's voice had not been heard calling,
"Jo, dear, come in.  I want you."

     Just what Laurie longed to say, with a different meaning!
As he listened, he lost his place, the music ended with a broken
chord, and the musician sat silent in the dark.

     "I can't stand this," muttered the old gentleman. Up he
got, groped his way to the piano, laid a kind hand on either
of the broad shoulders, and said, as gently as a woman, "I
know, my boy, I know."

     No answer for an instant, then Laurie asked sharply, "Who
told you?"

     "Jo herself."

     "Then there's an end of it!"  And he shook off his grand-
father's hands with an impatient motion, for though grateful
for the sympathy, his man's pride could not bear a man's pity.

     "Not quite.  I want to say one thing, and then there shall
be an end of it," returned Mr. Laurence with unusual mildness.
"You won't care to stay at home now, perhaps?"

     "I don't intend to run away from a girl.  Jo can't prevent
my seeing her, and I shall stay and do it as long as I like,"
interrupted Laurie in a defiant tone.

     "Not if you are the gentleman I think you.  I'm disap-
pointed, but the girl can't help it, and the only thing left
for you to do is to go away for a time.  Where will you go?"

     "Anywhere.  I don't care what becomes of me."  And Laurie
got up with a reckless laugh that grated on his grandfather's
ear.

     "Take it like a man, and don't do anything rash, for God's
sake.  Why not go abroad, as you planned, and forget it?"

     "I can't."

     "But you've been wild to go, and I promised you should
when you got through college."

     "Ah, but I didn't mean to go alone!"  And Laurie walked
fast through the room with an expression which it was well
his grandfather did not see.

     "I don't ask you to go alone.  There's someone ready and
glad to go with you, anywhere in the world."

     "Who, Sir?'  stopping to listen.

     "Myself."

     Laurie came back as quickly as he went, and put out his
hand, saying huskily, "I'm a selfish brute, but--you know--
Grandfather--"

     "Lord help me, yes, I do know, for I've been through it all
before, once in my own young days, and then with your father.
Now, my dear boy, just sit quietly down and hear my plan.  It's
all settled, and can be carried out at once," said Mr. Laurence,
keeping hold of the young man, as if fearful that he would break
away as his father had done before him.

     "Well, sir, what is it?"  And Laurie sat down, without a
sign of interest in face or voice.

     "There is business in London that needs looking after.  I
meant you should attend to it, but I can do it better myself,
and things here will get on very well with Brooke to manage
them.  My partners do almost everything, I'm merely holding
on until you take my place, and can be off at any time."

     "But you hate traveling, Sir.  I can't ask it of you at
your age," began Laurie, who was grateful for the sacrifice,
but much preferred to go alone, if he went at all.

     The old gentleman knew that perfectly well, and particu-
larly desired to prevent it, for the mood in which he found his
grandson assured him that it would not be wise to leave him to
his own devices.  So, stifling a natural regret at the thought
of the home comforts he would leave behind him, he said stoutly,
Bless your soul, I'm not superannuated yet.  I quite enjoy the
idea.  It will do me good, and my old bones won't suffer, for
traveling nowadays is almost as easy as sitting in a chair."

     A restless movement from Laurie suggested that his chair
was not easy, or that he did not like the plan, and made the
old man add hastily, "I don't mean to be a marplot or a bur-
den.  I go because I think you'd feel happier than if I was
left behind.  I don't intend to gad about with you, but leave
you free to go where you like, while I amuse myself in my own
way.  I've friends in London and Paris, and should like to
visit them.  Meantime you can go to Italy, Germany, Switzer-
land, where you will, and enjoy pictures, music, scenery,
and adventures to your heart's content."

     Now, Laurie felt just then that his heart was entirely
broken and the world a howling wilderness, but at the sound
of certain words which the old gentleman artfully introduced
into his closing sentence, the broken heart gave an unexpected
leap, and a green oasis or two suddenly appeared in the howling
wilderness. He sighed, and then said, in a spiritless tone,
"Just as you like, Sir.  It doesn't matter where I go or what
I do."

     "It does to me, remember that, my lad.  I give you entire
liberty, but I trust you to make an honest use of it.  Promise
me that, Laurie."

     "Anything you like, Sir."

     "Good," thought the old gentleman.  "You don't care now,
but there'll come a time when that promise will keep you out
of mischief, or I'm much mistaken."

     Being an energetic individual, Mr. Laurence struck while
the iron was hot, and before the blighted being recovered spirit
enough to rebel, they were off.  During the time necessary for
preparation, Laurie bore himself as young gentleman usually do
in such cases.  He was moody, irritable, and pensive by turns,
lost his appetite, neglected his dress and devoted much time
to playing tempestuously on his piano, avoided Jo, but con-
soled himself by staring at her from his window, with a tragic
face that haunted her dreams by night and oppressed her with a
heavy sense of guilt by day.  Unlike some sufferers, he never
spoke of his unrequited passion, and would allow no one, not
even Mrs. March, to attempt consolation or offer sympathy.  On
some accounts, this was a relief to his friends, but the weeks
before his departure were very uncomfortable, and everyone re-
joiced that the `poor, dear fellow was going away to forget his
trouble, and come home happy'.  Of course, he smiled darkly at
their delusion, but passed it by with the sad superiority of
one who knew that his fidelity like his love was unalterable.

     When the parting came he affected high spirits, to conceal
certain inconvenient emotions which seemed inclined to assert
themselves.  This gaiety did not impose upon anybody, but they
tried to look as if it did for his sake, and he got on very well
till Mrs. March kissed him, whit a whisper full of motherly
solicitude.  Then feeling that he was going very fast, he hastily
embraced them all round, not forgetting the afflicted Hannah, and
ran downstairs as if for his life.  Jo followed a minute after to
wave her hand to him if he looked round.  He did look round, came
back, put his arms about her as she stood on the step above him,
and looked up at her with a face that made his short appeal elo-
quent and pathetic.

     "Oh, Jo, can't you?"

     "Teddy, dear, I wish I could!"

     That was all, except a little pause.  Then Laurie straightened
himself up, said, "It's all right, never mind," and went away with-
out another word.  Ah, but it wasn't all right, and Jo did mind, for
while the curly head lay on her arm a minute after her hard answer,
she felt as if she had stabbed her dearest friend, and when he left
her without a look behind him, she knew that the boy Laurie never
would come again.

                     CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

     When Jo came home that spring, she had been struck with
the change in Beth.  No one spoke of it or seemed aware of it,
for it had come too gradually to startle those who saw her
daily, but to eyes sharpened by absence, it was very plain and
a heavy weight fell on Jo's heart as she saw her sister's face.
It was no paler and but littler thinner than in the autumn, yet
there was a strange, transparent look about it, as if the mortal
was being slowly refined away, and the immortal shining through
the frail flesh with an indescribably pathetic beauty.  Jo saw
and felt it, but said nothing at the time, and soon the first
impression lost much of its power, for Beth seemed happy, no
one appeared to doubt that she was better, and presently in
other cares Jo fora time forgot her fear.

     But when Laurie was gone, and peace prevailed again, the
vague anxiety returned and haunted her.  She had confessed
her sins and been forgiven, but when she showed her savings
and proposed a mountain trip, Beth had thanked her heartily,
but begged not to go so far away from home.  Another little
visit to the seashore would suit her better, and as Grandma
could not be prevailed upon to leave the babies, Jo took Beth
down to the quiet place, where she could live much in the
open air, and let the fresh sea breezes blow a little color
into her pale cheeks.

     It was not a fashionable place, but even among the pleasant
people there, the girls made few friends, preferring to live for
one another.  Beth was too shy to enjoy society, and Jo too
wrapped up in her to care for anyone else.  So they were all in
all to each other, and came and went, quite unconscious of the
interest they exited in those about them, who watched with sym-
pathetic eyes the strong sister and the feeble one, always
together, as if they felt instinctively that a long separation
was not far away.

     They did feel it, yet neither spoke of it, for often between
ourselves and those nearest and dearest to us there exists a re-
serve which it is very hard to overcome. Jo felt as if a veil
had fallen between her heart and Beth's, but when she put out
her hand to lift it up, there seemed something sacred in the
silence, and she waited for Beth to speak. She wondered, and
was thankful also, that her parents did not seem to see what
she saw, and during the quiet weeks when the shadows grew so
plain to her, she said nothing of it to those at home, be-
lieving that it would tell itself when Beth came back no better.
She wondered still more if her sister really guessed the hard
truth, and what thoughts were passing through her mind during
the long hours when she lay on the warm rocks with her head in
Jo's lap, while the winds blew healthfully over her and the sea
made music at her feet.

    One day Beth told her.  Jo thought she was asleep, she lay
so still, and putting down her book, sat looking at her with
wistful eyes, trying to see signs of hope in the faint color on
Beth's cheeks.  But she could not find enough to satisfy her,
for the cheeks were very thin, and the hands seemed too feeble
to hold even the rosy little shells they had been collecting.
It came to her then more bitterly than ever that Beth was
slowly drifting away form her, and her arms instinctively
tightened their hold upon the dearest treasure she possessed.
For a minute her eyes were too dim for seeing, and when they
cleared, Beth was looking up at her so tenderly that there was
hardly any need for her to say, "Jo, dear, I'm glad you know
it.  I've tried to tell you, but I couldn't."

     There was no answer except her sister's cheek against her
own, not even tears, for when most deeply moved, Jo did not
cry.  She was the weaker then,land Beth tried to comfort and
sustain her, with her arms about her and the soothing words
she whispered in her ear.

     "I've known it for a good while, dear, and now I'm used
to it, it isn't hard to think of or to bear.  Try to see it so
and don't be troubled about me, because it's best, indeed it is."

     "Is this what made you so unhappy in the autumn, Beth? You
did not feel it then, land keep it to yourself so long, did you?"
asked Jo, refusing to see or say that it was best, but glad to
know that Laurie had no part in Beth's trouble.

     "Yes, I gave up hoping then, but I didn't like to own it.
I tried to think it was a sick fancy, and would not let it
trouble anyone.  But when I saw you all so well and strong and
full of happy plans, it was hard to feel that I could never be
like you, and then I was miserable, Jo."

     "Oh, Beth, and you didn't tell me, didn't let me comfort and
help you?  How could you shut me out, bear it all alone?"

     Jo's  voice was full of tender reproach, and her heart ached
to think of the solitary struggle that must have gone on while
Beth learned to say goodbye to health, love, and live, and take
up her cross so cheerfully.

     "Perhaps it was wrong, but I tried to do right. I wasn't sure,
no one said anything, and I hoped I was mistaken.  It would have
been selfish to frighten you all when Marmee was so anxious about
Meg, and Amy away, and you so happy with Laurie--at least I thought
so then."

     "And I thought you loved him, Beth, and I went away because
I couldn't," cried Jo, glad to say all the truth.

     Beth looked so amazed at the idea that Jo smiled in spite
of her pain, and added softly, "Then you didn't, dearie? I was
afraid it was so, and imagined your poor little heart full of
lovelornity all that while."

     "Why, Jo, how could I, when he was so fond of you?"  asked
Beth, as innocently as a child.  "I do love him dearly.  He is
so good to me, how can I help It?  But he could never be anything
to me but my brother.  I hope he truly will be, sometime."

     "Not through me," said Jo decidedly. "Amy is left for him,
and they would suit excellently, but I have no heart for such
things, now.  I don't care what becomes of anybody but you, Beth.
You must get well."

     "I want to, oh, so much!  I try, but every day I lose a little,
and feel more sure that I shall never gain it back.  It's like the
tide, Jo, when it turns, it goes slowly, but it can't be stopped.."

     "It shall be stopped, your tide must not turn so soon, nine-
teen is too young, Beth. I can't let you go. I'll work and pray
and fight against it. I'll keep you in spite of everything. There
must be ways, it can't be too late.  God won't be so cruel as to
take you from me," cried poor Jo rebelliously, for her spirit was
far less piously submissive than Beth's.

     Simple, sincere people seldom speak much of their piety. It
shows itself in acts rather than in words, and has more influence
than homilies or protestations.  Beth could not reason upon or
explain the faith that gave her courage and patience to give up
life, and cheerfully wait for death. Like a confiding child, she
asked no questions, but left everything to God and nature, Father
and Mother of us all, feeling sure that they, and they only,
could teach and strengthen heart and spirit for this life and
the life to come.  She did not rebuke Jo with saintly speeches,
only loved her better for her passionate affection, and clung
more closely to the dear human love, from which our Father never
means us to be weaned, but through which He draws us closer to
Himself. She could not say, "I'm glad to go," for life was very
sweet for her.  She could only sob out, "I try to be willing,"
while she held fast to Jo, as the first bitter wave of this
great sorrow broke over them together.

     By and by Beth said, with recovered serenity, "You'll tell
them this when we go home?"

     "I think they will see it without words," sighed Jo, for now
it seemed to her that Beth changed every day.

     "Perhaps not.  I've heard that the people who love best are
often blindest to such things. If they don't see it, you will tell
them for me.  I don't want any secrets, and it's kinder to prepare
them.  Meg has John and the babies to comfort her, but you must
stand by Father and Mother, won't you Jo?"

     "If I can.  But, Beth, I don't give up yet.  I'm going to be-
lieve that it is a sick fancy, and not let you think it's true."
said Jo, trying to speak cheerfully.

     Beth lay a minute thinking, and then said in her quiet way,
"I don't know how to express myself, and shouldn't try to anyone
but you, because I can't speak out except to my Jo.  I only mean
to say that I have a feeling that it never was intended I should
live long.  I'm not like the rest of you.  I never made any plans
about what I'd do when I grew up.  I never thought of being marr-
ied, as you all did.  I couldn't seem to imagine myself anything
but stupid little Beth, trotting about at home, of no use anywhere
but there. I never wanted to go away, and the hard part now is
the leaving you all.  I'm not afraid, but it seems as if I should
be homesick for you even in heaven."

     Jo could not speak, and for several minutes there was no
sound but the sigh of the wind and the lapping of the tide.  A
white-winged gull flew by, with the flash of sunshine on its
silvery breast.  Beth watched it till it vanished, and her eyes
were full of sadness.  A little gray-coated sand bird came trip-
ping over the beach `peeping' softly to itself, as if enjoying
the sun and sea.  It came quite close to Beth, and looked at her
with a friendly eye and sat upon a warm stone, dressing its wet
feathers, quite at home.  Beth smiled and felt comforted, for
the tiny thing seemed to offer its small friendship and remind
her that a pleasant world was still to be enjoyed.

     "Dear little bird!  See, Jo, how tame it is.  I like peeps
better than the gulls.  They are not so wild and handsome, but
they seem happy, confiding little things.  I used to call them
my birds last summer, and Mother said they reminded her of me
--busy, quaker-colored creatures, always near the shore, and
always chirping that contented little song of theirs. You are
the gull, Jo, strong and wild, fond of the storm and the wind,
flying far out to sea, and happy all alone.  Meg is the turtle-
dove, and Amy is like the lark she write about, trying to get
up among the clouds, but always dropping down into its nest
again.  Dear little girl!  She's so ambitious, but her heart is
good and tender, and no matter how high she flies, she never
will forget home.  I hope I shall see her again, but she seems
so far away."

     "She is coming in the spring, and I mean that you shall be
all ready to see and enjoy her.  I'm going to have you well and
rosy by that time." began Jo, feeling that of all the changes
in Beth, the talking change was the greatest, for it seemed to
cost no effort now, and she thought aloud in a way quite unlike
bashful Beth.

     "Jo, dear, don't hope any more.  It won't do any good.  I'm
sure of that.  We won't be miserable, but enjoy being together
while we wait.  We'll have happy times, for I don't suffer much,
and I think the tide will go out easily, if you help me."

     Jo leaned down to kiss the tranquil face, and with that
silent kiss, she dedicated herself soul and body to Beth.

     She was right.  There was no need of any words when they
got home, for Father and Mother saw plainly now what they had
prayed to be saved from seeing.  Tired with her short journey,
Beth went at once to bed, saying how glad she was to be home,
and when Jo went down, she found that she would be spared the
hard task of telling Beth's secret.  Her father stood leaning
his head on the mantelpiece and did not turn as she came in,
but her mother stretched out her arms as if for help, and Jo
went to comfort her without a word.

               CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

     At three o'clock in the afternoon, all the fashionable world
at Nice may be seen on the Promenade des Anglais--a charming place,
for the wide walk, bordered with palms, flowers, and tropical shrubs,
is bounded on one side by the sea, on the other by the grand drive,
lined with hotels and villas, while beyond lie orange orchards and
the hills.  Many nations are represented, many languages spoken, many
costumes worn, and on a sunny day the spectacle is as gay and brill-
iant as a carnival.  Haughty English, lively French, sober Germans,
handsome Spaniards, ugly Russians, meek Jews, free-and-easy Americans,
all drive,sit, or saunter here, chatting over the news, and criti-
czing the latest celebrity who has arrived--Ristori or Dickens, Victor
Emmanuel or the Queen of the Sandwich Islands. The equipages are as
varied as the company and attract as much attention, especially the
low basket barouches in which ladies drive themselves, with a pair
of dashing ponies, gay nets to keep their voluminous  flounces from
overflowing the diminutive vehicles, and little grooms on the perch
behind.

     Along this walk, on Christmas Day, a tall young man walked
slowly, with his hands behind him, and a somewhat absent expression
of countenance.  He looked like an Italian, was dressed like an
Englishman, and had the independent air of an American--a combi-
nation which caused sundry pairs of feminine eyes to look approv-
ingly after him, and sundry dandies in black velvet suits, with
rose-colored neckties, buff gloves, and orange flowers in their
buttonholes, to shrug their shoulders, and then envy him his inches.
There were plenty of pretty faces to admire, but the young man took
little notice of them, except to glance now and then at some blonde
girl in blue.  Presently he strolled out of the promenade and
stood a moment at the crossing, as if undecided whether to go and
listen to the band in the Jardin Publique, or to wander along the
beach toward Castle Hill.  The quick trot of ponies feet made him
look up, as one of the little carriages, containing a single
young lady, came rapidly down the street.  The lady was young,
blonde, and dressed in blue.  He stared a minute, then his whole
face woke up, and, waving his hat like a boy, he hurried forward
to meet her.

     "Oh, Laurie, is it really you?  I thought you'd never come!"
cried Amy, dropping the reins and holding out both hands, to the
great scandalization of a French mamma, who hastened her daughter's
steps, lest she should be demoralized by beholding the free manners
of these `mad English'.

     "I was detained by the way, but I promised to spend Christmas
with you, and here I am."

     "How is your grandfather?  When did you come?  Where are you
staying?"

     "Very well--last night--at the Chauvain. I called at your
hotel, but you were out."

     "I have so much to say, I don't know where to begin!  Get
in and we can talk at our ease.  I was going for a drive and
longing for company.  Flo's saving up for tonight."

     "What happens then, a ball?"

     "A Christmas party at out hotel.  There are many Americans
there, and they give it in honor of the day.  You'll go with us,
of course?  Aunt will be charmed."

     "Thank you.  Where now?" asked Laurie, leaning back and
folding his arms, a proceeding which suited Amy, who preferred
to drive, for her parasol whip and blue reins over the white
ponies backs afforded her infinite satisfaction.

     "I'm going to the bankers first for letters, and then to
Castle Hill.  The view is so lovely, and I like to feed the pea-
cocks.  Have you ever been there?"

     "Often, years ago, but I don't mind having a look at it."

     "Now tell me all about yourself.  The last I heard of you,
your grandfather wrote that he expected you from Berlin."

     "Yes, I spent a month there and then joined him in Paris,
where he has settled for the winter.  He has friends there and
finds plenty to amuse him, so I go and come, and we got on cap-
itally."

     "That's a sociable arrangement," said Amy, missing something
in Laurie's manner, though she couldn't tell what.

     "Why, you see, he hates to travel, and I hate to keep still,
so we each suit ourselves, and there is no trouble.  I am often
with him, and he enjoys my adventures, while I like to feel that
someone is glad to see me when I get back from my wanderings. Dirty
old hole, isn't it?" he added, with a look of disgust as they drove
along the boulevard to the Place Napoleon in the old city.

     "The dirt is picturesque, so I don't mind.  The river and the
hills are delicious, and these glimpses of the narrow cross streets
are my delight.  Now we shall have to wait for that procession to
pass.  It's going to the Church of St. John."

     While Laurie listlessly watched the procession of priests
under their canopies, white-veiled nuns bearing lighted tapers,
and some brotherhood in blue chanting as they walked, Amy watched
him, and felt a new sort of shyness steal over her, for he was
changed,and she could not find the merry-faced boy she left in
the moody-looking man beside her.  He was handsomer than ever and
greatly improved, she thought, but now that the flush of pleasure
at meeting her was over, he  looked tired and spiritless--not sick,
nor exactly unhappy, but older and graver than a year or two of
prosperous life should have made him.  She couldn't understand it
and did not venture to ask questions, so she shook her head and
touched up her ponies, as the procession wound away across the
arches of the Paglioni bridge and vanished in the church.

     "Que pensez-vous?" she said, airing her French, which had
improved in quantity, if not in quality, since she came abroad.

     "That mademoiselle has made good use of her time, and the
result is charming," replied Laurie, bowing with his hand on
his heart and an admiring look.

     She blushed with pleasure, but somehow the compliment did
not satisfy her like the blunt praises he used to give her at
home, when he promenaded round her on festival occasions, and
tole her she was `altogether jolly', with a hearty smile and an
approving pat on the head.  She didn't like the new tone, for
though not blase, it sounded indifferent in spite of the look.

     "If that's the way he's going to grow up, I wish he's stay
a boy," she thought, with a curious sense of disappointment and
discomfort, trying meantime to seem quite easy and gay.

     At Avigdor's she found the precious home letters and, giving
the reins to Laurie,read them luxuriously as they wound up the
shady road between green hedges, where tea roses bloomed as freshly
as in June.

     "Beth is very poorly, Mother says.  I often think I ought to
go home, but they all say `stay'.  So I do, for I shall never have
another chance like this," said Amy, looking sober over one page.

     "I think you are right, there.  You could do nothing at home,
and it is a great comfort to them to know that you are well and
happy, and enjoying so much, my dear."

     He drew a little nearer, and looked more like his old self as
he said that, and the fear that sometimes weighed on Amy's heart
was lightened, for the look, the act, the brotherly `my dear',
seemed to assure her that if any trouble did come, she would not
be alone in a strange land.  Presently she laughed and showed him
a small sketch of Jo in her scribbling suit, with the bow rampantly
erect upon her cap, and issuing from her mouth the words, `Genius
burns!'.

     Laurie smiled, took it, put it in his vest pocket `to keep it
from blowing away', and listened with interest to the lively letter
Amy read him.

     "This will be a regularly merry Christmas to me, with presents
in the morning, you and letters in the afternoon, and a party at
night," said Amy, as they alighted among the ruins of the old fort,
and a flock of splendid peacocks came trooping about them, tamely
waiting to be fed.  While Amy stood laughing on the bank above him
as she scattered crumbs to the brilliant birds, Laurie looked at her
as she had looked at him, with a natural curiosity to see what
changes time and absence had wrought.  He found nothing to perplex
or disappoint, much to admire and approve, for overlooking a few
little affectations of speech and manner, she was as sprightly and
graceful as ever, with the addition of that indescribable something
in dress and bearing which we call elegance.  Always mature for her
age, she had gained a certain aplomb in both carriage and conversation,
which made her seem more of a woman of the world than she was, but
her old petulance now and then showed itself, her strong will still
held its own, and her native frankness was unspoiled by foreign
polish.

     Laurie did not read all this while he watched her feed the pea-
cocks, but he saw enough to satisfy and interest him, and carried
away a pretty little picture of a bright-faced girl standing in the
sunshine, which brought out the soft hue of her dress, the fresh
color of her cheeks, the golden gloss of her hair, and made her a
prominent figure in the pleasant scene.

    As they came up onto the stone plateau that crowns the hill,
Amy waved her hand as if welcoming him to her favorite haunt, and
said, pointing here and there, "Do you remember the Cathedral and
the Corso, the fishermen dragging their nets in the bay, and the
lovely road to Villa Franca, Schubert's Tower, just below, and best
of all, that speck far out to sea which they say ils Corsica?"

     "I remember.  It's not much changed," he answered without
enthusiasm.

     "What Jo would give for a sight of that famous speck!" said
Amy, feeling in good spirits and anxious to see him so also.

     "Yes," was all he said,but he turned and strained his eyes to
see the island which a greater usurper than even Napoleon now made
interesting in his sight.

     "Take a good look at it for her sake, and then come and tell
me what you have been doing with yourself all this while," said
Amy, seating herself, ready for a good talk.

     But she did not get it, for though he joined her and answered
all her questions freely, she could only learn that he had roved
about the Continent and been to Greece.  So after idling away an
hour, they drove home again, and having paid his respects to Mrs.
Carrol, Laurie left them, promising to return in the evening.

     It must be recorded of Amy that she deliberately prinked that
night.  Time and absence had done its work on both the young people.
She had seen her old friend in a new light, not as `our boy', but as
a handsome and agreeable man, and she was conscious of a very natural
desire to find favor in his sight.  Amy knew her good points, and
made the most of them with the taste and skill which is a fortune to
a  poor and pretty woman.

     Tarlatan and tulle were cheap at Nice, so she enveloped herself
in them on such occasions, and following the sensible English fashion
of simple dress for young girls, got up charming little toilettes
with fresh flowers, a few trinkets, and all manner of dainty devices,
which were both inexpensive and effective.  It must be confessed
that the artist sometimes got possession of the woman, and indulged
in antique coiffures, statuesque attitudes, and classic draperies.
But, dear heart, we all have out little weaknesses,  and find it
easy to pardon such in the young, who satisfy our eyes with their
comeliness, and keep our  hearts merry with their artless vanities.

     "I do want him to think I look well, and tell them so at home,"
said Amy to herself, as she put on Flo's old white silk ball dress,
and covered it with a cloud of fresh illusion, out of which her
white shoulders and golden head emerged with a most artistic effect.
Her hair she had the sense to let alone, after gathering up the
thick waves and curls into a Hebe-like knot at the back of her head.

     "It's not the fashion, but it's becoming, and I can't afford to
make a fright of myself," she used to say, when advised to frizzle,
puff, or braid, as the latest style commanded.

     Having no ornaments fine enough for this important occasion,
Amy looped her fleecy skirts with rosy clusters of azalea, and
framed the white shoulders in delicate green vines.  Remembering
the painted boots, she surveyed her white satin slippers with
girlish satisfaction, and chassed down the room, admiring her
aristocratic feet all by herself.

     "My new fan just matches my flowers, my gloves fit to a charm,
and the real lace on Aunt's mouchoir gives an air to my whole dress.
If I only had a classical nose and mouth I should be perfectly happy,"
she said, surveying herself with a critical eye and a candle in
each hand.

     In spite of this affliction, she looked unusually gay and
graceful as she glided away.  She seldom ran--it did not suit her
style, she thought, for being tall, the stately and Junoesque was
more appropriate than the sportive or piquante.  She walked up and
down the long saloon while waiting for Laurie, and once arranged
herself under the chandelier, which had a good effect upon her
hair, then she thought better of it, and went away to the other
end of the room, as if ashamed of the girlish desire to have the
first view a propitious one.  It so happened that she could not
have done a better thing, for Laurie came in so quietly she
did not hear him, and as she stood at the distant window, with
her head half turned and one hand gathering up her dress, the
slender, white figure against the red curtains was as effective
as a well-placed statue.

     "Good evening, Diana!" said Laurie, with the look of satis-
faction she liked to see in his eyes when they rested on her.

     "Good evening, Apollo!" she answered, smiling back at
him, for he too looked unusually debonair, and the thought of
entering the ballroom on the arm of such a personable man
caused Amy to pity the four plain Misses Davis from the bottom
of her heart.

     "Here are your flowers. I arranged them myself, remember-
ing that you didn't like what Hannah calls a `sot-bookay', said
Laurie, handing her a delicate nosegay, in a holder that she
had long coveted as she daily passed it in Cardiglia's window.

     "How kind you are!" she exclaimed gratefully.  "If I'd
known you were coming I'd have had something ready for you today,
though not as pretty as this, I'm afraid."

     "Thank you.  It isn't what it should be, but you have im-
proved it," he added, as she snapped the silver bracelet on her
wrist.

     "Please don't."

     "I thought you liked that sort of thing."

     "Not from you, it doesn't sound natural, and I like your
old bluntness better."

     "I'm glad of it," he answered, with a look of relief, then
buttoned her gloves for her, and asked if his tie was straight,
just as he used to do when they went to parties together at
home.

     The company assembled in the long salle a manger that
evening was such as one sees nowhere but on the Continent.  The
hospitable Americans had invited every acquaintance they had
in Nice, and having no prejudice against titles, secured a few
to add luster to their Christmas ball.

     A Russian prince condescended to sit in a corner for an
hour and talk with a massive lady, dressed like Hamlet's mother
in  black velvet with a pearl bridle under her chin.  A Polish
count, aged eighteen, devoted himself to the ladies, who pro-
nounced him, `a fascinating dear', and a German Serene Something,
having come to supper alone, roamed vaguely about, seeking what
he might devour.  Baron Rothschild's private secretary, a large-
nosed Jew in tight boots, affably beamed upon  the world, as if
his master's name crowned him with a golden halo.  A stout
Frenchman, who knew the Emperor, came to indulge his mania for
dancing, and Lady de Jones, a British matron, adorned the scene
with her little family of eight.  Of course, there were many
light-footed, shrill-voiced American girls, handsome, lifeless-
looking English ditto, and a few plain but piquante French
demoiselles, likewise the usual set of traveling young gentle-
men who disported themselves gaily, while mammas of all nations
lined the walls and smiled upon them benignly when they danced
with their daughters.

     Any young girl can imagine Amy's state of mind when she
`took the stage' that night, leaning on Laurie's arm.  She
knew she looked well, she loved to dance, she felt that her
foot was on her native heath in a ballroom, and enjoyed the
delightful sense of power which comes when young girls first
discover the new and lovely kingdom they are born to rule by
virtue of beauty, youth, and womanhood.  She did pity the
Davis girls, who were awkward, plain, and destitute of escort,
except a grim papa and three grimmer maiden aunts, and she
bowed to them in her friendliest manner as she passed, which
was good of her, as it permitted them to see her dress, and
burn with curiosity to know who her distinguished-looking
friend might be.  With the first burst of the band, Amy's
color rose, her eyes began to sparkle, and her feet to tap the
floor impatiently, for she danced well and wanted Laurie to
know it.  Therefore the shock she received can better be
imagined than described, when he said in a perfectly tranquil
tone, "Do you care to dance?"

     "One usually does at a ball."

     Her amazed look and quick answer caused Laurie to repair
his error as fast as possible.

     "I meant the first dance.  May I have the honor?"

     "I can give you one if I put off the Count.  He dances
devinely, but he will excuse me, as you are an old friend," said
Amy, hoping that the name would have a good effect, and show
Laurie that she was not to be trifled with.

     "Nice little boy, but rather a short Pole to support . ..

              A daughter of the gods,
              Devinely tall, and most devinely fair,"

was all the satisfaction she got, however.

     The set in which they found themselves was composed of
English, and Amy was compelled to walk decorously through a
cotillion, feeling all the while as if she could dance the
tarantella with relish.  Laurie resigned her to the `nice little
boy', and went to do his duty to Flo, without securing Amy for
the joys to come, which reprehensible want of forethought was
properly punished, for she immediately engaged herself till
supper, meaning to relent if he then gave any signs penitence.
She showed him her ball book with demure satisfaction when he
strolled instead of rushed up to claim her for the next, a
glorious polka redowa.  But his polite regrets didn't impose
upon her, and when she galloped away with the Count, she saw
Laurie sit down by her aunt with an actual expression of relief.

     That was unpardonable, and Amy took no more notice of him
for a long while, except a word now and then when she came to
her chaperon between the dances for a necessary pin or a
moment's rest.  Her anger had a good effect, however, for she
hid it under a smiling face, and seemed unusually blithe and
brilliant.  Laurie's eyes followed her with pleasure, for she
neither romped nor sauntered, but danced with spirit and
grace, making the delightsome pastime what it should be.  He
very naturally fell to studying her from this new point of
view, and before the evening was half over, had decided that
`little Amy was going to make a very charming woman'.

     It was a lively scene, for soon the spirit of the social
season took possession of everyone, and Christmas merriment made
all faces shine, hearts happy, and heels light.  The musicians
fiddled, tooted, and banged as if they enjoyed it, everybody
danced who could, and those who couldn't admired their
neighbors with uncommon warmth.  The air was dark with Davises,
and many Jones gamboled like a flock of young giraffes.  The
golden secretary darted through the room like a meteor with
a dashing frenchwoman who carped the floor with her pink satin
train.  The serene Teuton found the supper table and was happy,
eating steadily through the bill of fare, and dismayed the
garcons by the ravages he committed.  But the Emperor's friend
covered himself with glory, for he danced everything, whether
he knew it or not, and introduced impromptu pirouettes when the
figures bewildered him.  The boyish abandon of that stout man
was charming to behold, for though he `carried weight', he
danced like an India-rubber ball.  He ran, he flew, he pranced,
his face glowed, his bald head shown, his coattails waved wildly,
his pumps actually twinkled in the air, and when the music
stopped, he wiped the drops from his brow, and beamed upon his
fellow men like a French Pickwick without glasses.

     Amy and her Pole distinguished themselves by equal enthu-
siasm but more graceful agility, and Laurie found himself
involuntarily keeping time to the rhythmic rise and fall of the
white slippers as they flew by as indefatigably as if winged.
When little Vladimir finally relinquished her, with assurances
that he was `desolated to leave so early', she was ready to
rest, and see how her recreant knight had borne his punishment.

     It had been successful, for at three-and-twenty, blighted
affections find a balm in friendly society, and young nerves
will thrill, young blood dance, and healthy young spirits rise,
when subjected to the enchantment of beauty, light, music, and
motion.  Laurie had a waked-up look as he rose to give her his
seat, and when he hurried away to bring her some supper, she
said to herself, with a satisfied smile, "Ah, I thought that
would do him good!"

     "You look like Balzac's `FEMME PEINTE PAR ELLE-NENE',"
he said, as he fanned her with one hand and held her coffee
cup in the other.

     "My rouge won't come off." And Amy rubbed her brilliant
cheek, and showed him her white glove with a sober simplicity
that made him laugh outright.

     "What do you call this stuff?" he asked, touching a fold
of her dress that had blown over his knee.

     "Illusion."

     "Good name for it.  It's very pretty--new thing, isn't it?"

     "It's as old as the hills.  You have seen it on dozens of
girls, and you never found out that it was pretty till now?
Stupide!"

     "I never saw it on you before, which accounts for the mis-
take, you see."

     "None of that, it is forbidden.  I'd rather take coffee
than compliments just now.  No, don't lounge, it makes me
nervous."

     Laurie sat bold upright, and meekly took her empty plate
feeling an odd sort of pleasure in having `little Amy' order
him about, for she had lost her shyness now, and felt an
irrestible desire to trample on him, as girls have a delightful
way of doing when lords of creation show any signs of subjection.

     "Where did you learn all this sort of thing?" he asked with
a quizzical look.

     "As `this sort of thing' is rather a vague expression, would
you kindly explain?" returned Amy, knowing perfectly well what he
meant, but wickedly leaving him to describe what is indescribable.

     "Well--the general air, the style, the self-possession, the--
the--illusion--you know", laughed Laurie, breaking down and help-
ing himself out of his quandary with the new word.

     Amy was gratified, but of course didn't show it, and demurely
answered, "Foreign life polishes one in spite of one's self.  I
study as well as play, and as for this"--with a little gesture
toward her dress--"why, tulle is cheap, posies to be had for
nothing, and I am used to making the most of my poor little things."

     Amy rather regretted that last sentence, fearing it wasn't in
good taste, but Laurie liked her better for it, and found himself
both admiring and respecting the brave patience that made the most
of opportunity, and the cheerful spirit that covered poverty with
flowers.  Amy did not know why he looked at her so kindly, now
why he filled up her book with his own name, and devoted himself
to her for the rest of the evening in the most delightful manner,
but the impulse that wrought this agreeable change was the result
of one of the new impressions which both of them were unconsciously
giving and receiving.

                   CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT

     In France the young girls have a dull time of it till they are
married, when `Vive la liberte!' becomes their motto.  In America,
as everyone knows,girls early sign the declaration of independence,
and enjoy their freedom with republican zest, but the young matrons
usually abdicate with the first heir to the throne and go into a
seclusion almost as close as a French nunnery, though by no means
as quiet.  Whether they like it or not, they are virtually put
upon the shelf as soon as the wedding excitement is over, and most
of them might exclaim, as did a very pretty woman the other day,
"I'm as handsome as ever, but no one takes any notice of me be-
cause I'm married."

     Not being a belle or even a fashionable lady, Meg did not
experience this affliction till her babies were a  year old,
for in her little world primitive customs prevailed, and she
found herself more admired and beloved than ever.

     As she was a womanly little woman, the maternal instinct
was very strong, and she was entirely absorbed in her children,
to the utter exclusion of everything and everybody else.  Day
and night she brooded over them with tireless devotion and
anxiety, leaving John to the tender mercies of the help, for
an Irish lady now presided over the kitchen department.  Being
a domestic man, John decidedly missed the wifely attentions he
had been accustomed to receive, but as he adored his babies, he
cheerfully relinquished his comfort for a time, supposing with
masculine ignorance that peace would soon be restored.  But
three months passed, and there was no return of repose.  Meg
looked worn and nervous, the babies absorbed every minute of
her time, the house was neglected, and Kitty, the cook, who took
life `aisy', kept him on short commons.  When he went out in
the morning he was bewildered by small commissions for the cap-
tive mamma, if he came gaily in at night, eager to embrace his
family, he was quenched by a "Hush!  They are just asleep after
worrying all day."  If he proposed a little amusement at home,
"No, it would disturb the babies."  If he hinted at a lecture
or a concert, he was answered with a reproachful look, and a
decided "Leave my children for pleasure, never!"  His sleep was
broken by infant wails and visions of a phantom figure pacing
noiselessly to and fro in the watches of the night.  His meals
were interrupted by the frequent flight of the presiding genius,
who deserted him, half-helped, if a muffled chirp sounded from
the nest above.  And when he read his paper of an evening,
Demi's colic got into the shipping list and Daisy's fall affected
the price of stocks, for Mrs. Brooke was only interested in dom-
estic news.

     The poor man was very uncomfortable, for the children had
bereft him of his wife, home was merely a nursery and the per-
petual `hushing' made him feel like a brutal intruder whenever
he entered the sacred precincts of Babyland.  He bore it very
patiently for six months, and when no signs of amendment appeared,
he did what other paternal exiles do--tried to get a little com-
fort elsewhere.  Scott had married and gone to housekeeping not
far off, and John fell into the way of running over for an hour
or two of an evening, when his own parlor was empty, and his
own wife singing lullabies that seemed to have no end.  Mrs.
Scott was a lively, pretty girl, with nothing to do but be
agreeable, and she performed her mission most successfully.  The
parlor was always bright and attractive,  the chessboard ready,
the piano in tune, plenty of gay gossip, and a nice little supper
set forth in tempting style.

     John would have preferred his own fireside if it had not
been so lonely, but as it was he gratefully took the next best
thing and enjoyed his neighbor's society.

     Meg rather approved of the new arrangement at first, and
found it a relief to know that John was having a good time
instead of dozing in the parlor, or tramping about the house
and waking the children.  But by-and-by, when the teething
worry was over and the idols went to sleep at proper hours,
leaving Mamma time to rest, she began to miss John, and find
her workbasket dull company, when he was not sitting opposite
in his old dressing gown, comfortably scorching his slippers
on the fender.  She would not ask him to stay at home, but felt
injured because he did not know that she wanted him without
being told, entirely forgetting the many evenings he had waited
for her in vain.  She was nervous and worn out with watching
and worry, and in that unreasonable frame of mind which the best
of mothers occasionally experience when domestic cares oppress
them.  Want of exercise robs them of cheerfulness, and too much
devotion to that idol of American women, the teapot, makes them
feel as if they were all nerve and no muscle.

     "Yes," she would say, looking in the glass, "I'm getting
old and ugly.  John doesn't find me interesting any longer, so
he leaves his faded wife and goes to see his pretty neighbor,
who has no incumbrances.  Well, the babies love me, they don't
care if I am thin and pale and haven't time to crimp my hair,
they are my comfort, and some day John will see what I've
gladly sacrificed for them, won't he, my precious?"

     To which pathetic appeal daisy would answer with a coo,
or Demi with a crow, and Meg would put by her lamentations for
a maternal revel, which soothed her solitude for the time being.
But the pain increased as politics absorbed John, who was always
running over to discuss interesting points with Scott, quite
unconscious that Meg missed him.  Not a word did she say, how-
ever, till her mother found her in tears one day, and insisted
on knowing what the matter was,for Meg's drooping spirits had
not escaped her observation.

     "I wouldn't tell anyone except you, Mother, but I really
do need advice, for if John goes on much longer I might as well
be widowed," replied Mrs. Brooke, drying her tears on Daisy's
bib with an injured air.

     "Goes on how, my dear?" asked her mother anxiously.

     "He's away all day, and at night when I want to see him,
he is continually going over to the Scotts'.  It isn't fair
that I should have the hardest work, and never any amusement.
Men are very selfish, even the best of them."

     "So are women.  Don't blame John till you see where you
are wrong yourself."

     "But it can't be right for him to neglect me."

     "Don't you neglect him?"

     "Why, Mother, I thought you'd take my part!"

     "So I do, as far as sympathizing goes, but I think the fault
is yours, Meg."

     "I don't see how."

     "Let me show you.  Did John ever neglect you, as you call it,
while you made it a point to give him your society of an evening,
his only leisure time?"

     "No, but I can't do it now, with two babies to tend."

     "I think you could, dear, and I think you ought.  May I
speak quite freely, and will you remember that it's Mother who
blames as well as Mother who sympathizes?"

     "Indeed I will!  Speak to me as if I were little Meg again.
I often feel as if I needed teaching more than ever since these
babies look to me for everything."

     Meg drew her low chair beside her mother's, and with a little
interruption in either lap, the two women rocked and talked loving-
ly together, feeling that the tie of motherhood made them more one
than ever.

     "You have only made the mistake that most young wives make--
forgotten your duty to your husband in your love for your chil-
dren.  A very natural and forgivable mistake, Meg, but one that
had better be remedied before you take to different ways, for
children should draw you nearer than ever, not separate you, as
if they were all yours, and John had nothing to do but support
them.  I've seen it for some weeks, but have not spoken, feeling
sure it would come right in time."

     "I'm afraid it won't.  If I ask him to stay, he'll think I'm
jealous, and I wouldn't insult him by such an idea.  He doesn't
see that I want him, and I don't know how to tell him without
words."

     "Make it so pleasant he won't want to go away.  My dear,
he's longing for his little home, but it isn't home without you,
and you are always in the nursery."

     "Oughtn't I to be there?"

     "Not all the time, too much confinement makes you nervous,
and then you are unfitted for everything.  Besides, you owe
something to John as well as to the babies. Don't neglect hus-
band for children, don't shut him out of the nursery, but teach
him how to help in it.  His place is there as well as yours, and
the children need him.  Let him feel that he has a part to do, and
he will do it gladly and faithfully, and it will be better for you
all."

     "You really think so, Mother?"

     "I know it, Meg, for I've tried it, and I seldom give advice
unless I've proved its practicability.  When you and Jo were little,
I went on just as you are, feeling as if I didn't do my duty unless
I devoted myself wholly to you.  Poor Father took to his books,
after I had refused all offers of help, and left me to try my ex-
periment alone.  I struggled along as well as I could, but Jo was
too much for me.  I nearly spoiled her by indulgence.  You were
poorly, and I worried about you till I fell sick myself.  Then
Father came to the rescue, quietly managed everything, and made
himself so helpful that I saw my mistake, and never have been able
to got on without him since.  That is the secret of our home hap-
piness.  He does not let business wean him from the little cares
and duties that affect us all, and I try not to let domestic worries
destroy my interest in his pursuits.  Each do our part alone in
many things, but at home we work together, always."

     "It is so, Mother, and my great wish is to be to my husband
and children what you have been to yours.  Show me how, I'll do
anything you say."

     "You were always my docile daughter.  Well, dear, if I were
you, I'd let John have more to do with the management of Demi,
for the boy needs training, and it's none too soon to begin.
Then I'd do what I have often proposed,, let Hannah come and
help you.  She is a capital nurse, and you may trust the precious
babies to her while you do more housework.  You need the exercise,
Hannah would enjoy the rest, and John would find his wife again.
Go out more, keep cheerful as well as busy, for you are the
sunshine-maker of the family, and if you get dismal there is no
fair weather.  Then I'd try to take an interest in whatever John
likes--talk with him, let him read to you, exchange ideas, and
help each other in that way.  Don't shut yourself up in a bandbox
because you are a woman, but understand what is going on, and
educate yourself to take your part in the world's work, for it
all affects you and yours."

     "John is so sensible, I'm afraid he will think I'm stupid if
I ask questions about politics and things."

     "I don't believe he would.  Love covers a multitude of sins,
and of whom could you ask more freely than of him?  Try it, and
see if he doesn't find your society far more agreeable than Mrs.
Scott's suppers."

     "I will.  Poor John!  I'm afraid I have neglected him sadly,
but I thought I was right, and he never said anything."

     "He tried not to be selfish, but he has felt rather forlorn,
I fancy.  This is just the time, Meg, when young married people
are apt to grow apart, and the very time when they ought to be
most together, for the first tenderness soon wears off, unless
care is taken to preserve it.  And no time is so beautiful and
precious to parents as the first years of the little lives
given to them to train.  Don't let John be a stranger to the
babies, for they will do more to keep him safe and happy in
this world of trial and temptation than anything else, and
through them you will learn to know and love one another as
you should.  Now, dear, good-by.  Think over Mother's preach-
ment, act upon it if it seems good, and God bless you all."

     Meg did think it over, found it good, and acted upon it,
though the first attempt was not made exactly as she planned
to have it.  Of course the children tyrannized over her, and
ruled the house as soon as they found out that kicking and
squalling brought them whatever they wanted.  Mamma was an
abject slave to their caprices, but Papa was not so easily
subjugated, and occasionally afflicted his tender spouse by
an attempt at paternal discipline with his obstreperous son.
For Demi inherited a trifle of his sire's firmness of char-
acter, we won't call it obstinacy, and when he made up his
little to have or to do anything, all the king's horses and
all the king's men could not change that pertinacious little
mind.  Mamma thought the dear too young to be taught to con-
quer his prejudices, but Papa believed that it never was too
soon to learn obedience.  So Master Demi early discovered that
when he undertook to `wrastle' with `Parpar', he always got
the worst of it, yet like the Englishman, baby respected the
man who conquered him, and loved the father whose grave "No,
no," was more impressive than all Mamma's love pats.

     A few days after the talk with her mother, Meg resolved
to try a social evening with John, so she ordered a nice
supper, set the parlor in order, dressed herself prettily, and
put the children to bed early, that nothing should interfere
with her experiment.  But unfortunately Demi's most uncon-
querable prejudice was against going to bed, and that night
he decided to go on a rampage.  So poor Meg sang and rocked,
told stories and tried every sleep-prevoking wile she could
devise, but all in vain, the big eyes wouldn't shut, and long
after Daisy had gone to byelow, like the chubby little bunch
of good nature she was, naughty Demi lay staring at the light,
with the most discouragingly wide-awake expression of counten-
ance.

     "Will Demi lie still like a good boy, while Mamma runs
down and gives poor Papa his tea?" asked Meg, as the hall
door softly closed, and the well-known step went tip-toeing
into the dining room.

     "Me has tea!" said Demi, preparing to join in the revel.

     "No, but I'll save you some little cakies for breakfast,
if you'll go bye-by like Daisy.  Will you, lovey?"

     "Iss!" and Demi shut his eyes tight, as if to catch sleep
and hurry the desired day.

     Taking advantage of the propitious moment, Meg slipped
away and ran down to greet her husband with a smiling face
and the little blue bow in her hair which was his especial
admiration.  He saw it at once and said with pleased surprise,
"Why, little mother, how gay we are tonight.   Do you expect
company?"

     "Only you, dear."

     "No, I'm tired of being dowdy, so I dressed up as a
change.  You always make yourself  nice for table, no matter
how tired you are, so why shouldn't I when I have the time?'

     "I do it out of respect for you, my dear," said old-
fashioned John.

     "Ditto, ditto, Mr. Brooke," laughed Meg, looking young
and pretty again, as she nodded to him over the teapot.

     "Well, it's altogether delightful, and like old times.  This
tastes right.  I drink your health, dear."  And John sipped his
tea with an air of reposeful rapture, which was of very short
duration however, for as he put down his cup, the door handle
rattled mysteriously, and a little voice was heard, saying im-
patiently . . .

     "Opy doy.  Me's tummin!"

     "It's that naughty boy.  I told him to go to sleep alone,
and here he is, downstairs, getting his death a-cold pattering
over that canvas," said Meg, answering the call.

     "Mornin' now," announced Demi in joyful tone as he entered,
with his long nightgown gracefully festooned over his arm and
every curl bobbing gayly as he pranced about the table, eyeing
the `cakies' with loving glances.

     "No, it isn't morning yet.  You must go to bed, and not
trouble poor Mamma.  Then you can have the little cake with
sugar on it."

     "Me loves Parpar," said the artful one, preparing to climb
the paternal knee and revel in forbidden joys.  But John shook
his head, and said to Meg. . .

     "If you told him to stay up there, and go to sleep alone,
make him do it, or he will never learn to mind you."

     "Yes, of course.  Come, Demi."  And Meg led her son away,
feeling a strong desire to spank the little marplot who hopped
beside her, laboring under the delusion that the bribe was to
be administered as soon as they reached the nursery.

     Nor was he disappointed, for that shortsighted woman
actually gave him a lump of sugar, tucked him into his bed,
and forbade any more promenades till morning.

     "Iss!" said Demi the perjured, blissfully sucking his sugar,
and regarding his first attempt as eminently successful.

     Meg returned to her place, and supper was progressing
pleasantly, when the little ghost walked again and exposed
the maternal delinquencies by boldly demanding, "More sudar,
Marmar."

     "Now this won't do," said John, hardening his heart against
the engaging little sinner.  "We shall never know any peace till
that child learns togo to bed properly.  You have made a slave of
yourself long enough.  Give him one lesson, and  then there will
be an end of it.  Put him in his bed and leave him, Meg."

     "He won't stay there, he never does unless I sit by him."

     "I'll manage him.  Demi, go upstairs, and get into your bed,
as Mamma bids you."

     "S'ant!" replied the young rebel, helping himself to the
coveted `cakie', and beginning to eat the same with calm aud-
acity.

     "You must never say that to Papa.  I shall carry you if you
don't go yourself."

     "Go 'way, me don't love Parpar."  And Demi retired to his
mother's skirts for protection.

     But even that refuge proved unavailing, for he was de-
livered over to the enemy, with a "Be gentle with him, John,"
which struck the culprit with dismay, for when Mamma deserted
him, then the judgment day was at hand.  Bereft of his cake,
defrauded of his frolic, and borne away by a strong hand to
that detested bed, poor Demi could not restrain his wrath, but
openly defied Papa, and kicked and screamed lustily all the
way upstairs.  The minute he was put into bed on one side, he
rolled out on the other, and made for the door, only to be
ignominiously caught up by the tail of his little toga and
put back again, which lively performance was kept up till the
young man's strength gave out, when he devoted himself to
roaring at the top of his voice.  This vocal exercise usually
conquered Meg, but John sat as unmoved as the post which is
popularly believed to be deaf.  No coaxing, no sugar, no
lullaby, no story, even the light was put out and only the
red glow of the fire enlivened the `big dark' which Demi
regarded with curiosity rather than fear.  This new order
of things disgusted him, and he howled dismally for `Marmar',
as his angry passions subsided, and recollections of his
tender bondwoman returned to the captive autocrat.  The
plaintive wail which succeeded the passionate roar went to
Meg's heart, and she ran up to say beseechingly . . .

     "Let me stay with him, he'll be good now, John."

     "No, my dear.  I've told him he must go to sleep, as you
bid him, and he must, if I stay here all night."

     "But he'll cry himself sick," pleaded Meg, reproaching her-
self for deserting her boy.

     "No, he won't, he's so tired he will soon drop off and then
the matter is settled, for he will understand that he has got to
mind.  Don't interfere, I'll manage him."

     "He's my child, and I can't have his spirit broken by harsh-
ness."

     "He's my child, and I won't have his temper spoiled by
indulgence.  Go down, my dear, and leave the boy to me."

     When John spoke in that masterful tone, Meg always obeyed,
and never regretted her docility.

     "Please let me kiss him once, John?"

     "Certainly.  Demi, say good night to Mamma, and let her
go and rest, for she is very tired with taking care of you all
day."

     Meg always insisted upon it that the kiss won the victory,
for after it was given, Demi sobbed more quietly, and lay quite
still at the bottom of the bed, whither he had wriggled in his
anguish of mind.

     "Poor little man, he's worn out with sleep and crying.  I'll
cover him up, and then go and set Meg's heart at rest." thought
John, creeping to the bedside, hoping to find his rebellious
heir asleep.

     But he wasn't, for the moment his father peeped at him,
Demi's eyes opened, his little chin began to quiver, and he put
up his arms, saying with a penitent hiccough, "Me's dood, now."

     Sitting on the stairs outside Meg wondered at the long
silence which followed the uproar, and after imagining all
sorts of impossible accidents, she slipped into the room to
set her fears at rest.  Demi lay fast asleep, not in his usual
spreadeagle attitude, but in a subdued bunch, cuddled close in
the circle of his father's arm and holding his father's finger,
as if he felt that justice was tempered with mercy, and had
gone to sleep a sadder and wiser baby.  So held, John had waited
with a womanly patience till the little hand relaxed its hold,
and while waiting had fallen asleep, more tired by that tussle
with his son than with his whole day's work.

     As Meg stood watching the two faces on the pillow, she
smiled to herself, and then slipped away again, saying in a
satisfied tone, "I never need fear that John will be too harsh
with my babies.  He does know how to manage them, and will be
a great help, for Demi is getting too much for me."

     When John came down at last, expecting to find a pensive
or reproachful wife, he was agreeably surprised to find Meg
placidly trimming a bonnet, and to be greeted with the re-
quest to read something about the election, if he was not
too tired.  John saw in a minute that a revolution of some
kind was going on, but wisely asked no questions, knowing
that Meg was such a transparent little person, she couldn't
keep a secret to save her life, and therefore the clue would
soon appear.  He read a long debate with the most amiable
readiness and then explained it in his most lucid manner,
while Meg tried to look deeply interested, to ask intelli-
gent questions, and keep her thoughts from wandering from the
state of the nation to the state of her bonnet.  In her secret
soul, however, she decided that politics were as bad as mathe-
matics, and the the mission of politicians seemed to be calling
each other names, but she kept these feminine ideas to herself,
and when John paused, shook her head and said with what she
thought diplomatic ambiguity, "Well, I really don't see what
we are coming to."

     John laughed, and watched her for a minute, as she poised
a pretty little preparation of lace and flowers on her hand,
and regarded it with the genuine interest which his harangue
had failed to waken.

     "She is trying to like politics for my sake, so I'll try and
like millinery for hers, that's only fair," thought John the Just,
adding aloud, "That's very pretty.  Is it what you call a break-
fast cap?"

     "My dear man, it's a bonnet!   My very best go-to-concert-
and-theater bonnet."

     "I beg your pardon, it was so small, I naturally mistook it
for one of the flyaway things you sometimes wear.  How do you
keep it on?"

     "these bits of lace are fastened under the chin with a rose-
bud, so."  And Meg illustrated by putting on the bonnet and re-
garding him with an air of calm satisfaction that was irresistible.

     "It's a love of a bonnet, but I prefer the face inside, for
it looks young and happy again."  And John kissed the smiling
face, to the great detriment of the rosebud under the chin.

     "I'm glad you like it, for I want you to take me to one
of the new concerts some night.  I really need some music to
put me in tune.  Will you, please?"

     "Of course I will, with all my heart, or anywhere else you
like.  You have been shut up so long, it will do you no end of
good, and I shall enjoy it, of all things.  What put it into
your head, little mother?"

     "Well, I had a talk with Marmee the other day, and told
her how nervous and cross and out of sorts I felt, and she
said I needed change and less care, so Hannah is to help me
with the children, and I'm to see to things about the house more,
and now and then have a little fun, just to keep me from getting
to be a fidgety, broken-down old woman before my time.  It's
only an experiment, John, and I want to try it for your sake
as much as for mine, because I've neglected you shamefully
lately, and I'm going to make home what it used to be, if I
can.  You don't object, I hope?"

     Never mind what John said, or what a very narrow escape
the little bonnet had from utter ruin.  All that we have any
business to know is that John did not appear to object, judg-
ing from the changes which gradually took place in the house
and its inmates.  It was not all Paradise by any means, but
everyone was better for the division of labor system.  The
children throve under the paternal rule, for accurate, sted-
fast John brought order and obedience into Babydom, while Meg
recovered her spirits and composed her nerves by plenty of
wholesome exercise, a little pleasure, and much confidential
conversation with her sensible husband.  Home grew homelike
again, and John had no wish to leave it, unless he took Meg
with him.  The Scotts came to the Brookes' now, and everyone
found the little house a cheerful place, full of happiness,
content, and family love.  Even Sallie Moffatt liked to go
there.  "It is always so quiet and pleasant here, it does me
good, Meg," she used to say, looking about her with wistful
eyes, as if trying to discover the charm, that she might use
it in her great house, full of splendid lonliness, for there
were no riotous, sunny-faced babies there, and Ned lived in
a world of lis own, where there was no place for her.

     This household happiness did not come all at once, but
John and Meg had found the key to it, and each year of Marr-
ied life taught them how to use it, unlocking the treasuries
of real home love and mutual helpfulness, which the poorest
may possess, and the richest cannot buy.  This is the sort
of shelf on which young wives and mothers may consent to be
laid, safe from the restless fret and fever of the world,
finding loyal lovers in the little sons and daughters who
cling to them, undaunted by sorrow, poverty, or age, walking
side by side, through fair and stormy weather, with a faithful
friend, who is, in the true sense of the good old Saxon word,
the `house-band', and learning, as Meg learned, that a woman's
happiest kingdom is home, her highest honor the art of ruling
it not as a queen, but as a wise wife and mother.

                   CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

     Laurie went to Nice intending to stay a week, and remained
a month.  He was tired of wandering about alone, and Amy's
familiar presence seemed to give a homelike charm to the
foreign scenes in which she bore a part.  He rather missed the
`petting' he used to receive, and enjoyed a taste of it again,
for no attentions, however flattering, from strangers, were half
so pleasant as the sisterly adoration of the girls at home.  Amy
never would pet him like the others, but she was very glad to
see him now, and quite clung to him, feeling that he was the
representative of the dear family for whom she longed more
than she would confess.  They naturally took comfort in each
other's society and were much together, riding, walking, dancing,
or dawdling, for at Nice no one can be very industrious during
the gay season.  But, while apparently amusing themselves in
the most careless fashion, they were half-consciously making
discoveries and forming opinions about each other.  Amy rose
daily in the estimation of her friend, but he sank in hers,
and each felt the truth before a word was spoken.  Amy tried
to please, and succeeded, for she was grateful for the many
pleasures he gave her, and repaid him with the little ser-
vices to which womanly women know how to lend an indescrib-
able charm.  Laurie made no effort of any kind, but just let
himself drift along as comfortably as possible, trying to
forget, and feeling that all women owed him a kind word be-
cause one had been cold to him.  It cost him no effort to be
generous, and he would have given Amy all the trinkets in
Nice if she would have taken them, but at the same time he
felt that he could not change the opinion she was forming of
him, and he rather dreaded the keen blue eyes that seemed to
watch him with such half-sorrowful, half-scornful surprise.

     "All the rest have gone to Monaco for the day.  I pre-
ferred to stay at home and write letters.  They are done now,
and I am going to Valrosa to sketch, will you come?'  said Amy,
as she joined Laurie one lovely day when he lounged in as usual
about noon.

     "Well, yes, but isn't it rather warm for such a long walk?"
he answered slowly, for the shaded salon looked inviting after
the glare without.

     "I'm going to have the little carriage, and Baptiste can
drive, so you'll have nothing to do but hold your umbrella,
and keep your gloves nice," returned Amy, with a sarcastic
glance at the immaculate kids, which were a weak point with
Laurie.

     "Then I'll go with pleasure."  And he put out his hand for
her sketchbook.  But she tucked it under her arm with a sharp . . .

     "Don't trouble yourself.  It's no exertion to me, but you
don't look equal to it."

     Laurie lifted his eyebrows and followed at a leisurely pace
as she ran downstairs, but when they got into the carriage he took
the reins himself, and left little Baptiste nothing to do but fold
his arms and fall asleep on his perch.

     The two never quarreled.  Amy was too well-bred, and just now
Laurie was too lazy, so in a minute he peeped under her hatbrim
with an inquiring air.  She answered him with a smile, and they
went on together in the most amicable manner.

     It was a lovely drive, along winding roads rich in the pic-
turesque scenes that delight beauty-loving eyes.  Here an ancient
monastery, whence the solemn chanting of the monks came down to
them.  There a bare-legged shepherd, in wooden shoes, pointed hat,
and rough jacket over one shoulder, sat piping on a stone while
his goats skipped among the rocks or lay at his feet.  Meek,
mouse-colored donkeys, laden with panniers of freshly cut grass
passed by, with a pretty girl in a capaline sitting between the
green piles, or an old woman spinning with a distaff as she went.
Brown, soft-eyed children ran out from the quaint stone hovels
to offer nosegays, or bunches of oranges still on the bough.
Gnarled olive trees covered the hills with their dusky foliage,
fruit hung golden in the orchard, and great scarlet anemones
fringed the roadside, while beyond green slopes and craggy heights,
the Maritime Alps rose sharp and white against the blue Italian sky.

     Valrosa well deserved its name, for in that climate of per-
petual summer roses blossomed everywhere.  They overhung the
archway, thrust themselves between the bars of the great gate
with a sweet welcome to passers-by, and lined the avenue, winding
through lemon trees and feathery palms up to the villa on the hill.
Every shadowy nook, where seats invited one to stop and rest, was
a mass of bloom, every cool grotto had its marble nymph smiling
from a veil of flowers and every fountain reflected crimson, white,
or pale pink roses, leaning down to smile at their own beauty.
Roses covered the walls of the house, draped the cornices, climbed
the pillars, and ran riot over the balustrade of the wide terrace,
whence one looked down on the sunny Mediterranean, and the white-
walled city on its shore.

     "This is a regular honeymoon paradise, isn't it?  Did you
ever see such roses?"  asked Amy, pausing on the terrace to en-
joy the view, and a luxurious whiff of perfume that came wander-
ing by.

     "No, nor felt such thorns," returned Laurie, with his thumb
in his mouth, after a vain attempt to capture a solitary scarlet
flower that grew just beyond his reach.

     "Try lower down, and pick those that have no thorns," said
Amy, gathering three of the tiny cream-colored ones that starred
the wall behind her. She put them in his buttonhole as a peace
offering, and he stood a minute looking down at them with a
curious expression, for in the Italian part of his nature there
was a touch of superstition, and he was just then in that state
of half-sweet, half-bitter melancholy, when imaginative young
men find significance in trifles and food for romance everywhere.
He had thought of Jo in reaching after the thorny red rose, for
vivid flowers became her, and she had often worn ones like that
from the greenhouse at home.  The pale roses Amy gave him were
the sort that the Italians lay in dead hands, never in bridal
wreaths, and for a moment he wondered if the omen was for Jo or
for himself, but the next instant his American common sense got
the better of sentimentality, and he laughed a heartier laugh
than Amy had heard since he came.

     "It's good advice, you'd better take it and save your fingers,"
she said, thinking her speech amused him.

     "Thank you, I will," he answered in jest, and a few months
later he did it in earnest.

     "Laurie, when are you going to your grandfather?" she asked
presently, as she settled herself on a rustic seat.

     "Very soon."

     "You have said that a dozen times within the last three
weeks."

     "I dare say, short answers save trouble."

     "He expects you, and you really ought to go."

     "Hospitable creature!  I know it."

     "Then why don't you do it?"

     "Natural depravity, I suppose."

     "Natural indolence, you mean.  It's really dreadful!"  And
Amy looked severe.

     "Not so bad as it seems, for I should only plague him if I
went, so I might as well stay and plague you a little longer,
you can bear it better, in fact I think it agrees with you ex-
cellently."  And Laurie composed himself for a lounge on the
broad ledge of the balustrade.

     Amy shook her head and opened her sketchbook with an
air of resignation, but she had made up her mind to lecture
`that boy' and in a minute she began again.

     "What are you doing just now?"

     "Watching lizards."

     "No, no.  I mean what do you intend and wish to do?"

     "Smoke a cigarette, if you'll allow me."

     "How provoking you are!  I don't approve of cigars and I
will only allow it on condition that you let me put you into my
sketch.  I need a figure."

     "With all the pleasure in life.  How will you have me, full-
length or three-quarters, on my head or my heels?  I should
respectfully suggest a recumbent posture, then put yourself in
also and call it `Dolce far niente'."

     "Stay as you are, and go to sleep if you like.  I intend to
work hard," said Amy in her most energetic tone.

     "What delightful enthusiasm!"  And he leaned against a tall
urn with an ir of entire satisfaction.

     "What would Jo say if she saw you now?"  asked  Amy impat-
iently, hoping to stir him up by the mention of her still more
energetic sister's name.

     "As usual, `Go away, Teddy.  I'm busy!'"  He laughed as he
spoke, but the laugh was not natural, and a shade passed over
his face, for the utterance of the familiar name touched the
wound that was not healed yet.  Both tone and shadow struck Amy,
for she had seen and heard them before, and now she looked up
in time to catch a new expression on Laurie's face--a hard bitter
look, full of pain, dissatisfaction, and regret. It was gone be-
fore she could study it and the listless expression back again.
She watched him for a moment with artistic pleasure, thinking
how like an Italian he looked, as he lay basking in the sun
with uncovered head and eyes full of southern dreaminess, for
he seemed to have forgotten her and fallen into a reverie.

     "You look like the effigy of a young knight asleep on his
tomb," she said, carefully tracing the well-cut profile defined
against the dark stone.

     "Wish I was!"

     "That's a foolish wish, unless you have spoiled your life.
You are so changed, I sometimes think--" There Amy stopped,
with a half-timid, half-wistful look, more significant than her
unfinished speech.

     Laurie saw and understood the affectionate anxiety which
she hesitated to express, and looking straight into her eyes,
said, just as he used to say it to her mother, "It's all right,
ma'am."

     That satisfied her and set at rest the doubts that had be-
gun to worry her lately.  It also touched her, and she showed
that it did, by the cordial tone in which she said . . .

     "I'm glad of that!  I didn't think you'd been a very bad
boy, but I fancied you might have wasted money at that wicked
Baden-Baden, lost your heart to some charming Frenchwoman
with a husband, or got into some of the scrapes that young men
seem to consider a necessary part of a foreign tour.  Don't
stay out there in the sun, come and lie on the grass here and
`let us be friendly', as Jo used to say when we got in the sofa
corner and told secrets."

     Laurie obediently threw himself down on the turf, and
began to amuse himself by sticking daisies into the ribbons of
Amy's hat, that lay there.

     "I'm all ready for the secrets."  And he glanced up with
a decided expression of interest in his eyes.

     "I've none to tell.  You may begin."

     "Haven't one to bless myself with.  I thought perhaps you'd
had some news from home.."

     "You have heard all that has come lately.  Don't you hear
often?  I fancied Jo would send you volumes."

     "She's very busy.  I'm roving about so, it's impossible to
be regular, you know.  When do you begin your great work of art,
Raphaella?'  he asked. changing the subject abruptly after
another pause, in which he had been wondering if Amy knew his
secret and wanted to talk about it.

     "Never," she answered, with a despondent but decided air.
"Rome took all the vanity out of me, for after seeing the
wonders there, I felt too insignificant to live and gave up
all my foolish hopes in despair."

     "Why should you, with so much energy and talent?"

     "That's just why, because talent isn't genius, and no
amount of energy can make it so.   I want to be great,or noth-
ing.  I won't be a common-place dauber, so I don't intend to
try any more."

     "And what are you going to do with yourself now, if I
may ask?"

     "Polish up my other talents, and be an ornament to society,
if I get the chance."

     It was a characteristic speech, and sounded daring, but
audacity becomes young people, and Amy's ambition had a good
foundation.  Laurie smiled, but he liked the spirit with
which she took up a new purpose when a long-cherished one
died, and spent no time lamenting.

     "Good!  And here is where Fred Vaughn comes in, I fancy."

     Amy preserved a discreet silence, but there was a con-
scious look in her downcast face that made Laurie sit up and
say gravely, "Now I'm going to play brother, and ask questions.
May I?"

     "I don't promise to answer."

     "Your face will, if your tongue won't.  You aren't woman of
the world enough yet to hide your feelings, my dear.  I heard
rumors about Fred and you last year, and it's my private op-
inion that if he had not been called home so suddenly and
detained so long, something would have come of it, hey?"

     "That's not for me to say," was Amy's grim reply, but her
lips would smile, and there was a traitorous sparkle of the
eye which betrayed that she knew her power and enjoyed the
knowledge.

     "You are not engaged, I hope?"  And Laurie looked very
elder-brotherly and grave all of a sudden.

     "No."

     "But you will be, if he comes back and goes properly down
on his knees, won't you?"

     "Very likely."

     "Then you are fond of old Fred?"

     "I could be, if I tried."

     "But you don't intend to try till the proper moment? Bless
my soul, what unearthly prudence!  He's a good fellow, Amy, but
not the man I fancied you'd like."

     "He is rich, a gentleman, and has delightful manners,"
began Amy, trying to be quite cool and dignified, but feeling
a little ashamed of herself, in spite of the sincerity of her
intentions.

     "I understand.  Queens of society can't get on without money,
so you mean to make a good match, and start in that way?  Quite
right and proper, as the world goes, but it sounds odd from the
lips of one of your mother's girls."

     "True, nevertheless."

     A short speech, but the quiet decision with which it was
uttered contrasted curiously with the young speaker.  Laurie
felt this instinctively and laid himself down again, with a
sense of disappointment which he could not explain.  His look
and silence, as well as a certain inward self-disapproval,
ruffled Amy, and made her resolve to deliver her lecture with-
out delay.

     "I wish you'd do me the favor to rouse yourself a little,"
she said sharply.

     "Do it for me, there's a dear girl."

     "I could, if I tried."  And she looked as if she would like
doing it in the most summary style.

     "Try, then.  I give you leave," returned Laurie, who en-
joyed having someone to tease, after his long abstinence from
his favorite pastime.

     "You'd be angry in five minutes."

     "I'm never angry with you.  It takes two flints to make a
fire.  You are as cool and soft as snow."

     "You don't know what I can do.  Snow produces a glow and
a tingle, if applied rightly.  Your indifference is half af-
fectation, and a good stirring up would prove it."

     "Stir away, it won't hurt me and it may amuse you, as the
big man said when his little wife beat him.  Regard me in the
light of a husband or a carpet, and beat till you are tired,
if that sort of exercise agrees with you."

     Being decidedly nettled herself, and longing to see him
shake off the apathy that so altered him, Amy sharpened both
tongue and pencil, and began.

     "Flo and I have got a new name for you.  It's Lazy Laur-
ence.  How do you like it?"

     She thought it would annoy him, but he only folded his
arms under his head, with an imperturbable, "That's not bad.
Thank you, ladies."

     "Do you want to know what I honestly think of you?"

     "Pining to be told."

     "Well, I despise you."

     If she had even said `I hate you' in a petulant or co-
quettish tone, he would have laughed and rather liked it, but
the grave, almost sad, accent in her voice made him open his
eyes, and ask quickly . . .

     "Why, if you please?"

     "Because, with every chance for being good, useful, and
happy, you are faulty, lazy, and miserable."

     "Strong language, mademoiselle."

     "If you like it, I'll go on."

     "Pray do, it's quite interesting."

     "I thought you'd find it so.  Selfish people always like to
talk about themselves."

     "Am I selfish?"  The question slipped out involuntarily and
in a tone of surprise, for the one virtue on which he prided
himself was generosity.

     "Yes, very selfish," continued Amy, in a calm, cool voice,
twice as effective just then as an angry one.  "I'll show you
how, for I've studied you while we were frolicking, and I'm
not at all satisfied with you.  Here you have been abroad
nearly six months, and done nothing but waste time and money
and disappoint your friends."

     "Isn't a fellow to have any pleasure after a four-year
grind?"

     "You don't look as if you'd had much.  At any rate, you are
none the better for it, as far as I can see.  I said when we
first met that you had improved.  Now I take it all back, for I
don't think you half so nice as when I left you at home.  You
have grown abominably lazy, you like gossip, and waste time on
frivolous things, you are contented to be petted and admired
by silly people, instead of being loved and respected by wise
ones.  With money, talent, position, health, and beauty, ah
you like that old Vanity!  But it's the truth, so I can't help
saying it, with all these splendid things to use and enjoy, you
can find nothing to do but dawdle, and instead of being the man
you ought to be, you are  only . . ."  There she stopped, with
a look that had both pain and pity in it.

     "Saint Laurence on a gridiron," added Laurie, blandly
finishing the sentence.  But the lecture began to take effect,
for there was a wide-awake sparkle in his eyes now and a
half-angry, half-injured expression replaced the former in-
difference.

     "I supposed you'd take it so.  You men tell us we are
angels, and say we can make you what we will, but the instant
we honestly try to do you good, you laugh at us and won't
listen, which proves how much your flattery is worth." Amy
spoke bitterly, and turned her back on the exasperating
martyr at her feet.

     In a minute a hand came down over the page, so that she
could not draw, and Laurie's voice said, with a droll imitation
of a penitent child, "I will be good, oh, I will be good!"

     But Amy did not laugh, for she was in earnest, and tapping
on the outspread hand with her pencil, said soberly, "Aren't
you ashamed of a hand like that?  It's as soft and white as a
woman's, and looks as if it never did anything but wear Jouvin's
best gloves and pick flowers for ladies. You are not a dandy,
thank Heaven, so I'm glad to see there are no diamonds or big
seal rings on it, only the little old one Jo gave you so long
ago.  Dear soul, I wish she was here to help me!"

     "So do I!"

     The hand vanished as suddenly as it came, and there was
energy enough in the echo of her wish to suit even Amy. She
glanced down at him with a new thought in her mind, but he
was lying with his hat half over his face, as if for shade, and
his mustache hid his mouth.  She only saw his chest rise and
fall, with a long breath that might have been a sigh, and the
hand that wore the ring nestled down into the grass, as if to
hide something too precious or too tender to be spoken of.
All in a minute various hints and trifles assumed shape and
significance in Amy's mind, and told her what her sister never
had confided to her.  She remembered that Laurie never spoke
voluntarily of Jo, she recalled the shadow on his face just
now, the change in his character, and the wearing of the little
old ring which was no ornament to a handsome hand.  Girls are
quick to read such signs and feel their eloquence.  Amy had
fancied that perhaps a love trouble was at the bottom of the
alteration, and now she was sure of it.  Her keen eyes filled,
and when she spoke again, it was in a voice that could be
beautifully soft and kind when she chose to make it so.

     "I know I have no right to talk so to you, Laurie, and if
you weren't the sweetest-tempered fellow in the world, you'd be
very angry with me.  But we are all so fond and proud of you,
I couldn't bear to think they should be disappointed in you at
home as I have been, though, perhaps they would understand
the change better than I do."

     "I think they would," came from under the hat, in a grim
tone, quite as touching as a broken one.

     "They ought to have told me, and not let me go blundering
and scolding, when I should have been more kind and patient
than ever.  I never did like that Miss Randal and now I hate
her!" said artful Amy, wishing to be sure of her facts this
time.

     "Hang Miss Randal!"  And Laurie knocked the hat off his
face with a look that left no doubt of his sentiments toward
that young lady.

     "I beg pardon, I thought . . ."  And there she paused
diplomatically.

     "No, you didn't, you knew perfectly well I never cared for
anyone but Jo," Laurie said that in his old, impetuous tone,
and turned his face away as he spoke.

     "I did think so, but as they never said anything about it,
and you came away, I supposed I was mistaken.  And Jo wouldn't
be kind to you?  Why, I was sure she loved you dearly."

     "She was kind, but not in the right way, and it's lucky for
her she didn't love me, if I'm the good-for-nothing fellow you
think me.  It's her fault though, and you may tell her so."

     The hard, bitter look came back again as he said that, and
it troubled Amy, for she did not know what balm to apply.

     "I was wrong, I didn't know.  I'm very sorry I was so cross,
but I can't help wishing you'd bear it better, Teddy, dear."

     "Don't, that's her name for me!"  And Laurie put up his
hand with a quick gesture to stop the words spoken in Jo's
half-kind, half-reproachful tone.  "Wait till you've tried it
yourself," he added in a low voice, as he pulled up the grass
by the handful.

     "I'd take it manfully, and be respected if i couldn't be
loved," said Amy, with the decision of one who knew nothing
about it.

     Now, Laurie flattered himself that he had borne it remark-
ably well, making no moan, asking no sympathy, and taking his
trouble away to live it down alone.  Amy's lecture put the
Matter in a new light, and for the first time it did look
weak and selfish to lose heart at the first failure, and shut
himself up in moody indifference.  He felt as if suddenly
shaken out of a pensive dream and found it impossible to go
to sleep again.  Presently he sat up and asked slowly, "Do
you think Jo would despise me as you do?"

     "Yes, if she saw you now.  She hates lazy people.  Why don't
you do something splendid, and make her love you?"

     "I did my best, but it was no use."

     "Graduating well, you mean?  That was no more than you
ought to have done, for your grandfather's sake.  It would
have been shameful to fail after spending so much time and
money, when everyone knew that you could do well."

     "I did fail, say what you will, for Jo wouldn't love me,"
began Laurie, leaning his head on his hand in a despondent
attitude.

     "No, you didn't, and you'll say so in the end, for it did
you good, and proved that you could do something if you tried.
If you'd only set about another task of some sort, you'd soon
be your hearty, happy self again, and forget your trouble."

     "That's impossible."

     "Try it and see.  You needn't shrug your shoulders, and
think, `Much she knows about such things'.  I don't pretend
to be wise, but I am observing, and I see a great deal more
than you'd imagine.  I'm interested in other people's ex-
periences and inconsistencies, and though I can't explain, I
remember and use them for my own benefit.  Love Jo all your
days, if you choose, but don't let it spoil you, for it's
wicked to throw away so many good gifts because you can't
have the one you want.  There, I won't lecture any more, for
I know you'll wake up and be a man in spite of that hard-
hearted girl."

     Neither spoke for several minutes.  Laurie sat turning
the little ring on his finger, and Amy put the last touches to
the hasty sketch she had been working at while she talked.
Presently she put it on his knee, merely saying, "How do you
like that?"

     He looked and then he smiled, as he could not well help
doing, for it was capitally done, the long, lazy figure on the
grass, with listless face, half-shut eyes, and one hand holding
a cigar, from which came the little wreath of smoke that en-
circled the dreamer's head.

     "How well you draw!" he said, with a genuine surprise
and pleasure at her skill, adding, with a half-laugh, "Yes,
that's me."

     "As you are.  This is as you were."  And Amy laid another
sketch beside the one he held.

     It was not nearly so well done, but there was a life and
spirit in it which atoned for many faults, and it recalled the
past so vividly that a sudden change swept over the young
man's face as he looked.  Only a rough sketch of Laurie taming
a horse.  Hat and coat were off, and every line of the active
figure, resolute face, and commanding attitude was full of
energy and meaning.  The handsome brute, just subdued, stood
arching his neck under the tightly drawn rein, with one foot
impatiently pawing the ground, and ears pricked up as if
listening for the voice that had mastered him.  In the ruffled
mane. The rider's breezy hair and erect attitude, there was a
suggestion of suddenly arrested motion, of strength, courage,
and youthful buoyancy that contrasted sharply with the supine
grace of the `DOLCE FAR NIENTE' sketch.  Laurie said nothing
but as his eye went from one to the other, Amy say him flush
up and fold his lips together as if he read and accepted the
little lesson she had given him.  That satisfied her, and
without waiting for him to speak, she said, in her sprightly
way . . .

     "Don't you remember the day you played Rarey with Puck,
and we all looked on?  Meg and Beth were frightened, but Jo
clapped and pranced, and I sat on the fence and drew you.  I
found that sketch in my portfolio the other day, touched it
up, and kept it to show you."

     "Much obliged.  You've improved immensely since then,
and I congratulate you.  May I venture to suggest in ` a
honeymoon paradise' that five o'clock is the dinner hour at
your hotel?"

     Laurie rose as he spoke, returned the pictures with a smile
and a bow and looked at his watch, as if to remind her that
even moral lectures should have an end.  He tried to resume his
former easy, indifferent air, but it was an affectation now, for
the rousing had been more effacious than he would confess.  Amy
felt the shade of coldness in his manner, and said to herself . ..

     "Now, I've offended him.  Well, if it does him good, I'm
glad, if it makes him hate me, I'm sorry, but it's true, and
I can't take back a word of it."

     They laughed and chatted all the way home, and little
Baptist, up behind, thought that monsieur and madamoiselle
were in charming spirits.  But both felt ill at ease.  The
friendly frankness was disturbed, the sunshine had a shadow
over it, and despite their apparent gaiety, there was a secret
discontent in the heart of each.

     "Shall we see you this evening, mon frere?"  asked Amy, as
they parted at her aunt's door.

     "Unfortunately I have an engagement.  Au revoir, madam-
oiselle."  And Laurie bent as if to kiss her hand, in the
foreign fashion, which became him better than many men.  Some-
thing in his face made Amy say quickly and warmly . . .

     "No, be yourself with me, Laurie, and part in the good
old way.  I'd rather have a hearty English handshake than
all the sentimental salutations in France."

     "Goodbye, dear." And with these words, uttered in the
tone she liked, Laurie left her, after a handshake almost pain-
ful in its heartiness.

     Next morning, instead of the usual call, Amy received a
note which made her smile at the beginning and sigh at the end.

     My Dear Mentor,
     Please make my adieux to your aunt, and exult within
yourself, for `Lazy Laurence' has gone to his grandpa, like
the best of boys.  A pleasant winter to you, and may the gods
grant you a blissful honeymoon at Valrosa!  I think Fred
would be benefited by a rouser.  Tell him so, with my con-
gratulations.
                 Yours gratefully,   TELEMACHUS

     "Good boy!  I'm glad he's gone," said Amy, with an ap-
proving smile.  The next minute her face  fell as she glanced
about the empty room, adding, with an involuntary sigh,  "Yes,
I am glad, but how I shall miss him."

                       CHAPTER FORTY

     When the first bitterness was over, the family accepted
the inevitable, and tried to bear it cheerfully, helping one
another by the increased affection which comes to bind house-
holds tenderly together in times of trouble.  They put away
their grief, and each did his or her part toward making that
last year a happy one.

     The pleasantest room in the house was set apart for Beth,
and in it was gathered everything that she most loved, flowers,
pictures, her piano, the little worktable, and the beloved
pussies.  Father's best books found their way there, Mother's
easy chair, Jo's desk, Amy's finest sketches, and every day
Meg brought her babies on a loving pilgrimage, to make sunshine
for Aunty Beth.  John quietly set apart a little sum, that he
might enjoy the pleasure of keeping the invalid supplied with
the fruit she loved and longed for.  Old Hannah never wearied
of concocting dainty dishes to tempt a capricious appetite,
dropping tears as she worked, and from across the sea came
little gifts and cheerful letters, seeming to bring breaths
of warmth and fragrance from lands that know no winter.

     Here, cherished like a household saint in its shrine, sat
Beth, tranquil and busy as ever, for nothing could change the
sweet, unselfish nature, and even while preparing to leave
life, she tried to make it happier for those who should remain
behind.  The feeble fingers were never idle, and one of her
pleasures  was to make little things for the school children
daily passing to and fro, to drop a pair of mittens from her
window for a pair of purple hands, a needlebook for some small
mother of many dolls, penwipers for young penmen toiling through
forests of pothooks, scrapbooks for picture-loving eyes, and
all manner of pleasant devices, till the reluctant climbers of
the ladder of learning found their way strewn with flowers, as
it were, and came to regard the gentle giver as a sort of fairy
godmother, who sat above there, and showered down gifts miracu-
lously suited to their tastes and needs.  If Beth had wanted any
reward, she found it in the bright little faces always turned up
to her window, with nods and smiles, and the droll little letters
which came to her, full of blots and gratitude.

     The first few months were very happy ones, and Beth often
used to look round, and say "How beautiful this is!" as they
all sat together in her sunny room, the babies kicking and crow-
ing on the floor, mother and sisters working near, and father
reading, in his pleasant voice,from the wise old books which
seemed rich in good and comfortable words, as applicable now as
when written centuries ago, a little chapel, where a paternal
priest taught his flock the hard lessons all must learn, trying
to show them that hope can comfort love, and faith make resig-
nation possible.  Simple sermons, that went straight to the souls
of those who listened, for the father's heart was in the minister's
religion, and the frequent falter in the voice gave a double
eloquence to the words he spoke or read.

     It was well for all that this peaceful time was given them
as preparation for the sad hours to come, for by-and-by, Beth
said the needle was `so heavy', and put it down forever.  Talking
wearied her, faces troubled her, pain claimed her for its own,
and her tranquil spirit was sorrowfully perturbed by the ills
that vexed her feeble flesh.  Ah me!  Such heavy days, such long,
long nights, such aching hearts and imploring prayers, when those
who loved her best were forced to see the thin hands stretched out
to them beseechingly, to hear the bitter cry, "Help me, help me!"
and to feel that there was no help.  A sad eclipse of the serene
soul, a sharp struggle of the young life with death, but both were
mercifully brief, and then the natural rebellion over, the old peace
returned more beautiful than ever.  With the wreck of her frail body,
Beth's soul grew strong, and though she said little, those about her
felt that she was ready, saw that the first pilgrim called was like-
wise the fittest, and waited with her on the shore, trying to see
the Shining Ones coming to receive her when she crossed the river.

     Jo never left her for an hour since Beth had said "I feel
stronger when you are here."  She slept on a couch in the room,
waking often to renew the fire, to feed, lift, or wait upon the
patient creature who seldom asked for anything, and `tried not to
be a trouble'.  All day she haunted the room, jealous of any other
nurse, and prouder of being chosen then than of any honor her life
ever brought her.  Precious and helpful hours to Jo, for now her
heart received the teaching that it needed.  Lessons in patience
were so sweetly taught her that she could not fail to learn them,
charity for all, the lovely spirit that can forgive and truly
forget unkindness, the loyalty to duty that makes the hardest
easy, and the sincere faith that fears nothing, but trusts un-
doubtingly.

     Often when she woke Jo found Beth reading in her well-worn
little book, heard her singing softly, to beguile the sleepless
night, or saw her lean her face upon her hands, while slow tears
dropped through the transparent fingers, and Jo would lie watch-
ing her with thoughts too deep for tears, feeling that Beth, in
her simple, unselfish way, was trying to wean herself from the
dear old life, and fit herself for the life to come, by sacred
words of comfort, quiet prayers, and the music she loved so well.

     Seeing this did more for Jo than the wisest sermons, the
saintliest hymns, the most fervent prayers that any voice could
utter.  For with eyes made clear by many tears, and a heart
softened by the tenderest sorrow, she recognized the beauty of
her sister's life--uneventful, unambitious, yet full of the
genuine virtues which `smell sweet, and blossom in the dust',
the self-forgetfulness that makes the humblest on earth re-
membered soonest in heaven, the true success which is possible
to all.

     One night when Beth looked among the books upon her table,
to find something to make her forget the mortal weariness that
was almost as hard to bear as pain, as she turned the leaves of
her old favorite, Pilgrims's Progress, she found a little paper,
scribbled over in Jo's hand.  The name caught her eye and the
blurred look of the lines made her sure that tears had fallen
on it.

     "Poor Jo!  She's fast asleep, so I won't wake her to ask
leave.  She shows me all her things, and I don't think she'll
mind if I look at this", thought Beth, with a glance at her
sister, who lay on the rug, with the tongs beside her, ready
to wake up the minute the log fell apart.

                        MY BETH

              Sitting patient in the shadow
              Till the blessed light shall come,
              A serene and saintly presence
              Sanctifies our troubled home.
              Earthly joys and hopes and sorrows
              Break like ripples on the strand
              Of the deep and solemn river
              Where her willing feet now stand.

              O my sister, passing from me,
              Out of human care and strife,
              Leave me, as a gift, those virtues
              Which have beautified your life.
              Dear, bequeath me that great patience
              Which has power to sustain
              A cheerful, uncomplaining spirit
              In its prison-house of pain.

              Give me, for I need it sorely,
              Of that courage, wise and sweet,
              Which has made the path of duty
              Green beneath your willing feet.
              Give me that unselfish nature,
              That with charity devine
              Can pardon wrong for love's dear sake--
              Meek heart, forgive me mine!

              Thus our parting daily loseth
              Something of its bitter pain,
              And while learning this hard lesson,
              My great loss becomes my gain.
              For the touch of grief will render
              My wild nature more serene,
              Give to life new aspirations,
              A new trust in the unseen.

              Henceforth, safe across the river,
              I shall see forever more
              A beloved, household spirit
              Waiting for me on the shore.
              Hope and faith, born of my sorrow,
              Guardian angels shall become,
              And the sister gone before me
              By their hands shall lead me home.

     Blurred and blotted, faulty and feeble as the lines were, they
brought a look of inexpressible comfort to Beth's face, for her one
regret had been that she had done so little, and this seemed to assure
her that her life had not been useless, that her death would not bring
the despair she feared.  As she sat with the paper folded between her
hands, the charred log fell asunder.  Jo started up, revived the blaze,
and crept to the bedside, hoping Beth slept.

     "Not asleep, but so happy, dear.  See, I found this and read it.
I knew you wouldn't care.  Have I been all that to you, Jo?" she
asked, with wistful, humble earnestness.

     "OH, Beth, so much, so much!"  And Jo's head went down upon the
pillow beside her sister's.

     "Then I don't feel as if I'd wasted my life.  I'm not so good
as you make me, but I have tried to do right.  And now, when it's
too late to begin even to do better, it's such a comfort to know
that someone loves me so much, and feels as if I'd helped them."

     "More than any one in the world, Beth.  I used to think I
couldn't let you go, but I'm learning to feel that I don't lose
you, that you'll be more to me than ever, and death can't part
us, though it seems to."

     "I know it cannot, and I don't fear it any longer, for I'm
sure I shall be your Beth still, to love and help you more than
ever.  You must take my place, Jo, and be everything to Father
and Mother when I'm gone.  They will turn to you, don't fail
them, and if it's hard to work alone, remember that I don't
forget you, and that you'll be happier in doing that than writing
splendid books or seeing all the world, for love is the only thing
that we can carry with us when we go, and it makes the go easy."

     "I'll try, Beth."  And then and there Jo renounced her old
ambition, pledged herself to a new and better one, acknowledging
the poverty of other desires, and feeling the blessed solace of
a belief in the immortality of love.

     So the spring days came and went , the sky grew clearer, the
earth greener, the flowers were up fairly early, and the birds
came back in time to say goodbye to Beth, who, like a tired but
trustful child, clung to the hands that had led her all her life,
as Father and Mother guided her tenderly through the Valley of
the Shadow, and gave her up to God.

     Seldom except in books do the dying utter memorable words,
see visions, or depart with beatified countenances, and those
who have sped many parting souls know that to most the end
comes as naturally and simply as sleep.  As Beth had hoped, the
`tide went out easily', and in the dark hour before dawn, on
the bosom where she had drawn her first breath, she quietly
drew her last, with no farewell but one loving look, one little
sigh.

     With tears and prayers and tender hands, Mother and sisters
made her ready for the long sleep that pain would never mar again,
seeing with grateful eyes the beautiful serenity that soon replaced
the pathetic patience that had wrung their hearts so long, and
feeling with reverent joy that to their darling death was a
benignant angel, not a phantom full of dread.

     When morning came, for the first time in many months the
fire was out, Jo's place was empty, and the room was very still.
But a bird sang blithely on a budding bough, close by, the snow-
drops blossomed freshly at the window, and the spring sunshine
streamed in like a benediction over the placid face upon the
pillow, a face so full of painless peace that those who loved
it best smiled through their tears, and thanked God that Beth
was well at last.

                      CHAPTER FORTY-ONE

     Amy's lecture did Laurie good, though, of course, he did
not own it till long afterward.  Men seldom do, for when women
are the advisers, the lords of creation don't take the advice
till they have persuaded themselves that it is just what they
intended to do.  Then they act upon it, and, if it succeeds,
they give the weaker vessel half the credit of it.  If it
fails, they generously give her the whole.  Laurie went back
to his grandfather, and was so dutifully devoted for several
weeks that the old gentleman declared the climate of Nice had
improved him wonderfully, and he had better try it again.
There was nothing the young gentleman would have liked better,
but elephants could not have dragged him back after the scold-
ing he had received.  Pride forbid, and whenever the longing
grew very strong, he fortified his resolution by repeating
the words that had made the deepest impression, "I despise
you."  "Go and do something splendid that will make her love
you."

     Laurie turned the matter over in his mind so often that he
soon brought himself to confess that he had been selfish and
lazy, but then when a man has a great sorrow, he should be in-
dulged in all sorts of vagaries till he has lived it down.  He
felt that his blighted affections were quite dead now, and
though he should never cease to be a faithful mourner, there
was no occasion to wear his weeds ostentatiously. Jo wouldn't
love him, but he might make her respect and admire him by doing
something which should prove that a girl's no had not spoiled
his life.  He had always meant to do something, and Amy's
advice was quite unnecessary.  He had only been waiting till
the aforesaid blighted affections were decently interred. That
being done, he felt that he was ready to `hide his stricken
heart, and still toil on'.

     As Goethe, when he had a joy or a grief, put it into a song,
so Laurie resolved to embalm his love sorrow in music, and to
compose a Requiem which should harrow up Jo's soul and melt the
heart of every hearer.  Therefore the next time the old gentle-
man found him getting restless and moody and ordered him off,
he went to Vienna, where he had musical friends, and fell to
work with the firm determination to distinguish himself.  But
whether the sorrow was too vast to be embodied in music, or
music too ethereal to uplift a mortal woe, he soon discovered
that the Requiem was beyond him just at present.  It was evi-
dent that his mind was not in working order yet, and his ideas
needed clarifying, for often in the middle of a plaintive strain,
he would find himself humming a dancing tune that vividly re-
called the Christmas ball at Nice, especially the stout French-
man, and put an effectual stop to tragic composition for the
time being.

     Then he tried an opera, for nothing seemed impossible in
the beginning, but here again unforeseen difficulties beset
him.  He wanted Jo for his heroine, and called upon his memory
to supply him with tender recollections and romantic visions
of his love.  But memory turned traitor, and as if possessed
by the perverse spirit of the girl, would only recall Jo's
oddities, faults, and freaks, would only show her in the most
unsentimental aspects--beating mats with her head tied up in
a bandana, barricading herself with the sofa pillow, or throw-
ing cold water over his passion a la Gummidge--and an irresis-
table laugh spoiled the pensive picture he was endeavoring to
paint.  Jo wouldn't be put into the opera at any price, and he
had to give her up with a "Bless that girl, what a torment she is!"
and a clutch at his hair, as became a distracted composer.

     When he looked about him for another and a less intractable
damsel to immortalize in melody, memory produced one with the
most obliging readiness.  This phantom wore many faces, but it
always had golden hair, was enveloped in a diaphanous cloud, and
floated airily before his mind's eye in a pleasing chaos of roses,
peacocks, white ponies, and blue ribbons.  He did not give the
complacent wraith any name, but he took her for his heroine and
grew quite fond of her, as well he might, for he gifted her with
every gift and grace under the sun, and escorted her, unscathed,
through trials which would have annihilated any mortal woman.

     Thanks to this inspiration, he got on swimmingly for a time,
but gradually the work lost its charm, and he forgot to compose,
while he sat musing, pen in hand, or roamed about the gay city
to get some new ideas and refresh his mind, which seemed to be
in a somewhat unsettled state that winter.  He did not do much,
but he thought a great deal and was conscious of a change of
some sort going on in spite of himself.  "It's genius simmering,
perhaps.  I'll let it simmer, and see what comes of it," he said,
with a secret suspicion all the while that it wasn't genius, but
something far more common.  Whatever it was, it simmered to
some purpose, for he grew more and more discontented with his
desultory life, began to long for some real and earnest work
to go at, soul and body, and finally came to the wise conclu-
sion that everyone who loved music was not a composer.  Return-
ing from one of Mozart's grand operas, splendidly performed at
the Royal Theatre, he looked over his own, played a few of the
best parts, sat staring at the busts of Mendelssohn, Beethoven,
and bach, who stared benignly back again.  Then suddenly he
tore up his music sheets, one by one, and as the last fluttered
out of his hand, he said soberly to himself . . .

     "She is right!  Talent isn't genius, and you can't make it
so.  That music has taken the vanity out of my as Rome took it
out of her, and I won't be a humbug any longer.  Now what shall
I do?"

     That seemed a hard question to answer, and Laurie began to
wish he had to work for his daily bread.  Now if ever, occurred
an eligible opportunity for `going to the devil', as he once
forcibly expressed it, for he had plenty of money and nothing
to do, and Satan is proverbially fond of providing employment
for full and idle hands.  The poor fellow had temptations
enough from without and from within, but he withstood them
pretty well, for much as he valued liberty, he valued good
faith and confidence more, so his promise to his grandfather,
and his desire to be able to look honestly into the eyes of
the women who loved him, and say "All's well," kept him safe
and steady.

     Very likely some Mrs. Grundy will observe, "I don't be-
lieve it, boys will be boys, young men must sow their wild
oats, and women must not expect miracles."  I dare say you
don't, Mrs. Grundy, but it's true nevertheless.  Women work
a good many miracles, and I have a persuasion that they may
perform even that of raising the standard of manhood by
refusing to echo such sayings.  Let the boys be boys, the
longer the better, and let the young men sow their wild oats
if they must.  But mothers, sisters, and friends may help to
make the crop a small one, and keep many tares from spoiling
the harvest, by believing, and showing that they believe, in
the possibility of loyalty to the virtues which make men man-
liest in good women's eyes.  If it is a feminine delusion,
leave us to enjoy it while we may, for without it half the
beauty and the romance of life is lost, and sorrowful fore-
bodings would embitter all our hopes of the brave, tender-
hearted little lads, who still love their mothers better than
themselves and are not ashamed to own it.

     Laurie thought that the task of forgetting his love for Jo
would absorb all his powers for years, but to his great surprise
he discovered it grew easier every day.  He refused to believe
it at first, got angry with himself, and couldn't understand it,
but these hearts of ours are curious and contrary things, and
time and nature work their will in spite of us.  Laurie's heart
wouldn't ache.  The wound persisted in healing with a rapidity
that astonished him, and instead of trying to forget, he found
himself trying to remember.  He had not foreseen this turn of
affairs, and was not prepared for it.  He was disgusted with
himself, surprised at his own fickleness, and full of a
queer mixture of disappointment and relief that he could re-
cover from such a tremendous blow so soon.  He carefully
stirred up the embers of his lost love, but they refused to
burst into a blaze.  There was only a comfortable glow that
warmed and did him good without putting him into a fever,
and he was reluctantly obliged to confess that the boyish
passion was slowly subbsiding into a more tranquil sentiment,
very tender, a little sad and resentful still, but that was
sure to pass away in time, leaving a brotherly affection
which would last unbroken to the end.

     As the word `brotherly' passed through his mind in one
of his reveries, he smiled, and glanced up at the picture of
Mozart that was before him . . .

     "Well, he was a great man, and when he couldn't have
one sister he took the other, and was happy."

     Laurie did not utter the words, but he thought them, and
the next instant kissed the little old ring, saying to himself,
"No, I won't!  I haven't forgotten, I never can.  I'll try again,
and if that fails, why then . . .

     Leaving his sentence unfinished, he seized pen and paper
and wrote to Jo, telling her that he could not settle to any-
thing while there was the least hope of her changing her mind.
Couldn't she, wouldn't she, and let him come home and be happy?
While waiting for an answer he did nothing, but he did it
energetically, for he was in a fever of impatience.  It came
at last, and settled his mind effectually on one point, for Jo
decidedly couldn't and wouldn't.  She was wrapped up in Beth,
and never wished to hear the word love again.  Then she begged
him to be happy with somebody else, but always keep a little
corner of his ghart for his loving sister Jo.  In a postscript
she desired him not to tell Amy that Beth was worse, she was
coming home in the spring and there was no need of saddening
the remainder of her stay.  That would be time enough, please
God, but Laurie must write to her often, and not let her feel
lonely, homesick or anxious.

     "So I will, at once.  Poor little girl, it will be a sad
going home for her, I'm afraid."  And Laurie opened his desk,
as if writing to Amy had been the proper conclusion of the
sentence left unfinished some weeks before.

     But he did not write the letter that day, for as he rum-
maged out his best paper, he came across something which
changed his purpose.  Tumbling about in one part of the desk
among bills, passports, and business documents of various kinds
were several of Jo's letters, and in another compartment were
three notes from Amy, carefully tied up with one of her blue
ribbons and sweetly suggestive of the little dead roses put
away inside.  with a half-repentant, half-amused expression,
Laurie gathered up all Jo's letters, smoothed, folded,and put
them neatly into a small drawer of the desk, stood a minute
turning the ring thoughtfully on his finger, then slowly drew
it off, laid it with the letters, locked the drawer, and went
out to hear High Mass at Saint Stefan's, feeling as if there
had been a funeral, and though not overwhelmed with affliction,
this seemed a more proper way to spend the rest of the day than
in writing letters to charming young ladies.

     The letter went very soon, however, and was promptly ans-
wered, for Amy was homesick, and confessed it in the most
delightfully confiding manner.  The correspondence flourished
famously, and letters flew to and fro with unfailing regularity
all through the early spring.  Laurie sold his busts, made
allumettes of his opera, and went back to Paris, hoping some-
body would arrive before long.  He wanted desperately to go
to Nice, but would not till he was asked, and Amy would not
ask him, for just then she was having little experiences of
her own, which made her rather wish to avoid the quizzical
eyes of `out boy'.

     Fred Vaughn had returned, and put the question to which
she had once decided to answer, "Yes, thank you," but now she
said, "No, thank you," kindly but steadily, for when the time
came, her courage failed her, and she found that something
more than money and position was needed to satisfy the new
longing that filled her heart so full of tender hopes and
fears.  The words, "Fred is a good fellow, but not at all
the man I fancied you would ever like," and Laurie's face
when he uttered them, kept returning to her as pertinaciously
as her own did when she said in look, if not in words, "I
shall marry for money."  It troubled her to remember that
now, she wished she could take it back, it sounded so un-
womanly.  She didn't want Laurie to think her a heartless,
worldly creature.  She didn't care to be a queen of society
now half so much as she did to be a lovable woman.  She was
so glad he didn't hate her for the dreadful things she said,
but took them so beautifully and was kinder than ever.  His
letters were such a comfort, for the home letters were very
irregular and not half so satisfactory as his when they did
come.  It was not only a pleasure, but a duty to answer them,
for the poor fellow was forlorn, and needed petting, since Jo
persisted in being stonyhearted.  She ought to have made an
effort and tried to love him.  It couldn't be very hard,
many people would be proud and glad to have such a dear boy
care for them.  But Jo never would act like other girls, so
there was nothing to do but be very kind and treat him like
a brother.

     If all brothers were treated as well as Laurie was at
this period, they would be a much happier race of beings than
they are.  Amy never lectured now.  She asked his opinion on
all subjects, she was interested in everything he did, made
charming little presents for him, and sent him two letters
a week, full of lively gossip, sisterly confidences, and cap-
tivating sketches of the lovely scenes about her.  As few
brothers are complimented by having their letters carried
about in their sister's pockets, read and reread diligently,
cried over when short, kissed when long, and treasured care-
fully, we will not hint that Amy did any of these fond and
foolish things.  But she certainly did grow a little pale
and pensive that spring, lost much of her relish for society,
and went out sketching alone a good deal.  She never had much
to show when she came home, but was studying nature, I dare
say, while she sat for hours, with her hands folded, on the
terrace at Valrosa, or absently sketched any fancy that
occurred to her, a stalwart knight carved on a tomb, a young
man asleep in the grass, with his hat over his eyes, or a curly-
haired girl in gorgeous array, promenading down a ballroom on
the arm of a tall gentleman, both faces being left a blur
according to the last fashion in art, which was safe but not
altogether satisfactory.

     Her aunt thought that she regretted her answer to Fred,
and finding denials useless and explanations impossible, Amy
left her to think what she liked, taking care that Laurie
should know that Fred had gone to Egypt.  That was all, but
he understood it, and looked relieved, as he said to himself,
with a venerable air . ..

     "I was sure she would think better of it.  Poor old fellow!
I've been through it all, and I can sympathize."

     With that he heaved a great sigh, and then, as if he had
discharged his duty to the past, put his feet up on the sofa
and enjoyed Amy's letter luxuriously.

     While these changes were going on abroad, trouble had
come at home.  But the letter telling that Beth was failing
never reached Amy, and when the next found her at Vevay, for
the heat had driven them from Nice in May, and they had tra-
velled slowly to Switzerland, by way of Genoa and the Italian
lakes.  She bore it very well, and quietly submitted to the
family decree that she should not shorten her visit, for
since it was too late to say goodbye to Beth, she had better
stay, and let absence soften her sorrow.  But her heart was
very heavy, she longed to be at home, and every day looked
wistfully across the lake, waiting for Laurie to come and
comfort her.

     He did come very soon, for the same mail brought letters
to them both, but he was in Germany, and it took some days to
reach him.  The moment he read it, he packed his knapsack,
bade adieu to his fellow pedestrians, and was off to keep his
promise, with a heart full of joy and sorrow, hope and sus-
pense.

     He knew Vevay well, and as soon as the boat touched the
little quay, he hurried along the shore to La Tour, where the
Carrols were living en pension.  The garcon was in despair
that the whole family had gone to take a promenade on the
lake, but no, the blonde mademoiselle might be in the chateau
garden.  If monsier would give himself the pain of sitting
down, a flash of time should present her.  But monsieur could
not wait even a `flash of time', and in the middle of the
speech departed to find mademoiselle himself.

     A pleasant old garden on the borders of the lovely lake,
with chestnuts rustling overhead, ivy climbing everywhere, and
the black shadow of the tower falling far across the sunny
water.  At one corner of the wide, low wall was a seat,and here
Amy often came to read or work, or console herself with the
beauty all about her.  She was sitting here that day, leaning
her head on her hand, with a homesick heart and heavy eyes,
thinking of Beth and wondering why Laurie did not come.  She
did not hear him cross the courtyard beyond, nor see him pause
in the archway that led from the subterranean path into the
garden.  He stood a minute looking at her with new eyes, seeing
what no one had ever seen before, the tender side of Amy's char-
acter.  Everything about her mutely suggested love and sorrow,
the blotted letters in her lap, the black ribbon that tied up
her hair, the womanly pain and patience in her face, even the
little ebony cross at her throat seemed pathetic to Laurie,
for he had given it to her, and she wore it as her only orna-
ment.  If he had any doubts about the reception she would give
him, they were set at rest the minute she looked up and saw
him, for dropping everything, she ran to him, exclaiming in a
tone of unmistakable love and longing . . .

     "Oh, Laurie, Laurie, I knew you'd come to me!"

     I think everything was said and settled then, for as they
stood together quite silent for a moment, with the dark head
bent down protectingly over the light one, Amy felt that no
one could comfort and sustain her so well as Laurie, and
Laurie decided that Amy was the only woman in the world who
could fill Jo's place and make him happy.  He did not tell her
so, but she was not disappointed, for both felt the truth,
were satisfied, and gladly left the rest to silence.

     In a minute Amy went back to her place, and while she
dried her tears, Laurie gathered up the scattered papers,
finding in the sight of sundry well-worn letters and suggestive
sketches good omens for the future.  As he sat down beside her,
amy felt shy again, and turned rosy red at the recollection of
her impulsive greeting.

     "I couldn't help it, I felt so lonely and sad, and was so
very glad to see you.  It was such a surprise to look up and find
you, just as I was beginning to fear you wouldn't come," she said,
trying in vain to speak quite naturally.

     "I came the minute I heard.  I wish I could say something
to comfort you for the loss of dear little Beth, but I can only
feel, and . . ."  He could not get any further, for her too
turned bashful all of a sudden, and did not quite know what to
say.  He longed to lay Amy's head down on his shoulder, and tell
her to have a good cry, but he did not dare, so took her hand
instead, and gave it a sympathetic squeeze that was better than
words.

     "You needn't say anything, this comforts me," she said
softly.  "Beth is well and happy, and I mustn't wish her back,
but I dread the going home, much as I long to see them all.
We won't talk about it now, for it makes me cry, and I want
to enjoy you while you stay.  You needn't go right back, need
you?"

     "Not if you want me, dear."

     "I do, so much.  Aunt and Flo are very kind, but you
seem like one of the family, and it would be so comfortable to
have you for a little while."

     Amy spoke and looked so like a homesick child whose heart
was full that Laurie forgot his bashfulness all at once, and
gave her just what she wanted--the petting she was used to and
the cheerful conversation she needed.

     "Poor little soul, you look as if you'd grieved yourself
half sick!  I'm going to take care of you, so don't cry any
more, but come and walk about with me, the wind is too chilly
for you to sit still,"  he said, in the half-caressing, half-
commanding way that Amy liked, as he tied on her hat, drew
her arm through his, and began to pace up and down the
sunny walk under the new-leaved chestnuts.  He felt more at
ease upon his legs, and Amy found it pleasant to have a strong
arm to lean upon, a familiar face to smile at her, and a kind
voice to talk delightfully for her alone.

     The quaint old garden had sheltered many pairs of lovers,
and seemed expressly made for them, so sunny and secluded was
it, with nothing but the tower to overlook them, and the wide
lake to carry away the echo of their words, as it rippled by
below.  For an hour this new pair walked and talked, or rested
on the wall, enjoying the sweet influences which gave such a
charm to time and place, and when an unromantic dinner bell
warned them away, Amy felt as if she left her burden of lon-
liness and sorrow behind her in the chateau garden.

     The moment Mrs. Carrol saw the girl's altered face, she
was illuminated with a new idea, and exclaimed to herself,
"Now I understand it all--the child has been pining for young
Laurence.  Bless my heart, I never thought of such a thing!"

     With praiseworthy discretion, the good lady said nothing,
and betrayed no sign of enlightenment, but cordially urged
Laurie to stay and begged Amy to enjoy his society, for it
would do her more good than so much solitude.  Amy was a
model of docility, and as her aunt was a good deal occupied
with Flo, she was left to entertain her friend, and did it
with more than her usual success.

     At Nice, Laurie had lounged and Amy had scolded.  At
Vevay, Laurie was never idle, but always walking, riding,
boating, or studying in the most energetic manner, while
Amy admired everything he did and followed his example as
far and as fast as she could.  He said the change was owing
to the climate, and she did not contradict him, being glad
of a like excuse for her own recovered health and spirits.

     The invigorating air did them both good, and much ex-
ercise worked wholesome changes in minds as well as bodies.
They seemed to get clearer views of life and duty up there
among the everlasting hills.  The fresh winds blew away
desponding doubts, delusive fancies, and moody mists. The
warm spring sunshine brought out all sorts of aspiring ideas,
tender hopes, and happy thoughts.  The lake seemed to wash
away the troubles of the past, and the grand old mountains
to look benignly down upon them saying, "Little children,
love one another."

     In spite of the new sorrow, it was a very happy time, so
happy that Laurie could not bear to disturb it by a word.  It
took him a little while to recover from his surprise at the
cure of his first, and as he had firmly believed, his last
and only love.  He consoled himself for the seeming disloyalty
by the thought that Jo's sister was almost the same as Jo's
self, and the conviction that it would have been impossible
to love any other woman but Amy so soon and so well.  His first
wooing had been of the tempestuous order, and he looked back
upon ;it as if through a long vista of years with a feeling of
compassion blended with regret.  He was not ashamed of it,
but put it away as one of the bitter-sweet experiences of his
life, for which he could be grateful when the pain was over.
His second wooing, he resolved, should be as calm and simple
as possible.  There was no need  of having a scene, hardly
any need of telling Amy that he loved her, she knew it with-
out words and had given him his answer long ago.  It all came
about so naturally that no one could complain, and he knew that
everybody would be pleased, even Jo.  But when our first little
passion has been crushed, we are apt to be wary and slow in mak-
ing a second trial, so Laurie let the days pass, enjoying every
hour, and leaving to chance the utterance of the word that would
put an end to the first and sweetest part of his new romance.

     He had rather imagined that the denoument would take place
in the chateau garden by moonlight, and in the most graceful and
decorus manner, but it turned out exactly the reverse, for the
matter was settled on the lake at noonday in a few blunt words.
They had been floating about all the morning, from gloomy St. Gin-
golf to sunny Montreux, with the Alps of Savoy on one side, Mont
St. Bernard and the Dent du Midi on the other, pretty Vevay in
the valley, and Lausanne upon the hill beyond, a cloudless blue
sky overhead, and the bluer lake below, dotted with the pictur-
esque boats that look like white-winged gulls.

     They had been talking of Bonnivard, as they glided past
Chillon, and of Rousseau, as they looked up at Clarens, where he
wrote his Heloise.  Neither had read it, but they knew it was a
love story, and each privately wondered if it was half as inte-
resting as their own.  Amy had been dabbling her hand in the water
during the little pause that fell between them, and when she looked
up, Laurie was leaning on his oars with an expression in his eyes
that made her say hastily, merely for the sake of saying something . .

     "You must be tired.  Rest a little, and let me row.  It will
do me good, for since you came I have been altogether lazy and
luxurious."

     "I'm not tired, but you may take an oar, if you like.  There's
room enough, though I have to sit nearly in the middle, else the
boat won't trim," returned Laurie, as if he rather liked the arrang-
ment.

     Feeling that she had not mended matters much, Amy took the
offered third of a seat, shook her hair over her face, and accepted
an oar.  She rowed as well as she did many other things, and though
she used both hands, and Laurie but one, the oars kept time, and
the boat went smoothly through the water.

     "How well we pull together, don't we?" said Amy, who objected
to silence just then.

     "So well that I wish we might always pull in the same boat.
Will you,Amy?" very tenderly.

     "Yes, Laurie," very low.

     Then they both stopped rowing, and unconsciously added a
pretty little tableau of human love and happiness to the dissolving
views reflected in the lake.

                    CHAPTER FORTY-TWO

     It was easy to promise self-abnegation when self was
wrapped up in another, and heart and soul were purified by a
sweet example.  But when the helpful voice was silent, the
daily lesson over, the beloved presence gone, and nothing re-
mained but lonliness and grief, then Jo found her promise very
hard to keep.  How could she `comfort Father and Mother' when
her own heart ached with a ceaseless longing for her sister,
how could she `make the house cheerful' when all its light and
warmth and beauty seemed to have deserted it when Beth left the
old home for the new, and where in all the world could she `find
some useful, happy work to do', that would take the place of the
loving service which had been its own reward?  She tried in a
blind, hopeless way to do her duty, secretly rebelling against
it all the while, for it seemed unjust that her few joys should
be lessened, her burdens made heavier, and life get harder and
harder as she toiled along.  Some people seemed to get all sun-
shine, and some all shadow.  It was not fair, for she tried more
than Amy to be good, but never got any reward, only disappoint-
ment, trouble and hard work.

     Poor Jo, these were dark days to her, for something like
despair came over her when she thought of spending all her life
in that quiet house, devoted to humdrum cares, a few small plea-
sures, and the duty that never seemed to grow any easier.  "I
can't do it.  I wasn't meant for a life like this, and I know I
shall break away and do something desperate if somebody doesn't
come and help me," she said to herself, when her first efforts
failed and she fell into the moody, miserable state of mind which
often comes when strong wills have to yield to the inevitable.

     But someone did come and help her, though Jo did not recognize
her good angels at once because they wore familiar shapes and used
the simple spells best fitted to poor humanity.  Often she started
up at night, thinking Beth called her, and when the sight of the
little empty bed made her cry with the bitter cry of unsubmissive
sorrow, "Oh, Beth, come back!  Come back!" she did not stretch out
her yearning arms in vain.  For, as quick to hear her sobbing as
she had been to hear her sister's faintest whisper, her mother came
to comfort her, not with words only, but the patient tenderness
that soothes by a touch, tears that were mute reminders of a greater
grief than Jo's, and broken whispers, more eloquent than prayers,
because hopeful resignation went hand-in-hand with natural sorrow.
Sacred moments, when heart talked to heart in the silence of the
night, turning affliction to a blessing, which chastened grief and
strengthned love.  Feeling this, Jo's burden seemed easier to bear,
duty grew sweeter, and life looked more endurable, seen from the
safe shelter of her mother's arms.

     When aching heart was a little comforted, troubled mind like-
wise found help, for one day she went to the study, and leaning
over the good gray head lifted to welcome her with a tranquil smile,
she said very humbly, "Father, talk to me as you did to Beth.  I
need it more than she did, for I'm all wrong."

     "My dear, nothing can comfort me like this," he answered, with
a falter in his voice, and both arms round her, as if he too, needed
help, and did not fear to ask for it.

     Then, sitting in Beth's little chair close beside him, Jo told
her troubles, the resentful sorrow for her loss, the fruitless
efforts that discouraged her, the want of faith that made life look
so dark, and all the sad bewilderment which we call despair.  She
gave him entire confidence, he gave her the help she needed, and
both found consolation in the act.  For the time had come when they
could talk together not only as father and daughter, but as man and
woman, able and glad to serve each other with mutual sympathy as well
as mutual love.  Happy, thoughtful times there in the old study which
Jo called `the church of one member', and from which she came with
fresh courage, recovered cheerfulness, and a more submissive spirit.
For the parents who had taught one child to meet death without fear,
were trying now to teach another to accept life without despondency
or distrust, and to use its beautiful opportunities with gratitude
and power.

     Other helps had Jo--humble, wholesome duties and delights that
would not be denied their part in serving her, and which she slowly
learned to see and value.  Brooms and dishcloths never could
be as distasteful as they once had been, for Beth had presided
over both, and something of her housewifely spirit seemed to
linger around the little mop and the old brush, never thrown
away.  As she used them, Jo found herself humming the songs
Beth used to hum, imitating Beth's orderly ways, and giving the
little touches here and there that kept everything fresh and
cozy, which was the first step toward making home happy, though
she didn't know it till Hannah said with an approving squeeze
of the hand . . .

     "You thoughtful creeter, you're determined we shan't miss
that dear lamb ef you can help it.  We don't say much, but we
see it, and the Lord will bless you for't, see ef He don't."

     As they sat sewing together, Jo discovered how much improved
her sister Meg was, how well she could talk, how much she knew
about good, womanly impulses, thoughts, and feelings, how happy
she was in husband and children, and how much they were all doing
for each other.

     "Marriage is an excellent thing, after all.  I wonder if I
should blossom out half as well as you have, if I tried it?" said
Jo, as she constructed a kite for Demi in the topsy-turvy nursery.

     "It's just what you need to bring out the tender womanly half
of your nature, Jo.  You are like a chestnut burr, prickly outside,
but silky-soft within, and a sweet kernal, if one can only get at
it.  Love will make you show your heart one day, and then the rough
burr will fall off."

     "Frost opens chestnut burrs, ma`am, and it takes a good shake
to bring them down.  Boys go nutting, and I don't care to be bagged
by them," returned Jo, pasting away at the kite which no wind that
blows would ever carry up, for Daisy had tied herself on as a bob.

     Meg laughed, for she was glad to see a glimmer of Jo's old
spirit, but she felt it her duty to enforce her opinion by every
argument in her power, and the sisterly chats were not wasted, es-
pecially as two of Meg's most effective arguments were the babies,
whom Jo loved tenderly.  Grief is the best opener of some hearts,
and Jo's was nearly ready for the bag.  A little more sunshine to
ripen the nut, then, not a boy's impatient shake, but a man's hand
reached up to pick it gently from the burr, and find the kernal
sound and sweet.  If she suspected this, she would have shut up
tight, and been more prickly than ever, fortunately she wasn't
thinking about herself, so when the time came, down she dropped.

     Now, if she had been the heroine of a moral storybook, she
ought at this period of her life to have become quite saintly,
renounced the world, and gone about doing good in a mortified
bonnet, with tracts in her pocket.  But, you see, Jo wasn't a
heroine, she was only a struggling human girl like hundreds of
others, and she just acted out her nature, being sad, cross, list-
less, or energetic, as the mood suggested.  It's highly virtuous
to say we'll be good, but we can't do it all at once, and it takes
a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all together before some
of us even get our feet set in the right way.  Jo had got so far,
she was learning to do her duty, and to feel unhappy if she did
not, but to do it cheerfully, ah, that was another thing!  She
had often said she wanted to do something splendid, no matter how
hard, and now she had her wish, for what could be more beautiful
than to devote her life to Father and Mother, trying to make home
as happy to them as they had to her?  And if difficulties were
necessary to increase the splendor of the effort, what could be
harder for a restless, ambitious girl than to give up her own
hopes, plans, and desires, and cheerfully live for others?

     Providence had taken her at her word.  Here was the task, not
what she had expected, but better because self had no part in it.
Now, could she do it?  She decided that she would try, and in her
first attempt she found the helps I have suggested.  Still another
was given her, and she took it, not as a reward, but as a comfort,
as Christian took the refreshment afforded by the little arbor
where he rested, as he climbed the hill called Difficulty.

     "Why don't you write?  That always used to make you happy,"
said her mother once, when the desponding fit over-shadowed Jo.

     "I've no heart to write, and if I had, nobody cares for my
things."

     "We do.  Write something for us, and never mind the rest of
the world.  Try it, dear.  I'm sure it would do you good, and
please us very much."

     "Don't believe I can."  But Jo got out her desk and began to
overhaul her half-finished manuscripts.

     An hour afterward her mother peeped in and there she was,
scratching away, with her black pinafore on, and an absorbed ex-
pression, which caused Mrs. March to smile and slip away, well
pleased with the success of her suggestion.  Jo never knew how it
happened, but something got into that story that went straight to
the hearts of those who read it, for when her family had laughed
and cried over it, her father sent it, much against her will, to
one of the popular magazines, and to her utter surprise, it was
not only paid for, but others requested.  Letters from several
persons, whose praise was honor, followed the appearance of the
little story, newspapers copied it, and strangers as well as friends,
admired it.  For a small thing it was a great success, and Jo was
more astonished than when her novel was commended and condemned
all at once.

     "I don't understand it.  What can there be in a simple little
story like that to make people praise it so?" she said, quite be-
wildered.

     "There is truth in it, Jo, that's the secret.  Humor and pathos
make it alive, and you have found your style at last.  You wrote
with not thoughts of fame and money, and put your heart into it,
my daughter.  You have had the bitter, now comes the sweet.  Do
your best, and grow as happy as we are in your success."

     "If there is anything good or true in what I write, it isn't
mine.  I owe it all to you and Mother and Beth," said Jo, more
touched by her father's words than by any amount of praise from
the world.

     So taught by love and sorrow, Jo wrote her little stories,
and sent them away to make friends for themselves and her, finding
it a very charitable world to such humble wanderers, for they were
kindly welcomed, and sent home comfortable tokens to their mother,
like dutiful children whom good fortune overtakes.

     When Amy and Laurie wrote of their engagement, Mrs. March
feared that Jo would find it difficult to rejoice over it, but
her fears were soon set at rest, for thought Jo looked grave at
first, she took it very quietly, and was full of hopes and plans
for `the children' before she read the letter twice.  It was a
sort of written duet, wherein each glorified the other in lover-
like fashion, very pleasant to read and satisfactory to think of,
for no one had any objection to make.

     "You like it, Mother?" said Jo, as they laid down the closely
written sheets and looked at one another.

     "Yes, I hoped it would be so, ever since Amy wrote that she
had refused Fred. I felt sure then that something better than
what you call the `mercenary spirit' had come over her, and a
hint here and there in her letters made me suspect that love
and Laurie would win the day."

     "How sharp you are, Marmee, and how silent!  You never said
a worked to me."

     "Mothers have need of sharp eyes and discreet tongues when
they have girls to manage.  I was half afraid to put the idea
into your head, lest you should write and congratulate them be-
fore the thing was settled."

     "I'm not the scatterbrain I was.  You may trust me.  I'm
sober and sensible enough for anyone's confidante now."

     "So you are, my dear, and I should have made you mine,
only I fancied it might pain you to learn that your Teddy loved
someone else."

     "Now, Mother, did you really think I could be so silly and
selfish, after I'd refused his love, when it was freshest, if not
best?"

     "I knew you were sincere then, Jo, but lately I have thought
that if he came back, and asked again, you might perhaps, feel like
giving another answer.  Forgive me, dear, I can't help seeing that
you are very lonely, and sometimes there is a hungry look in your
eyes that goes to  my heart.  So I fancied that your boy might fill
the empty place if he tried now."

     "No, Mother, it is better as it ia, and I'm glad Amy has learned
to love him.  But you are right in one thing.  I am lonely, and per-
haps if Teddy had tried again, I might have said `Yes', not because
I love him any more, but because I care more to be loved than when
he went away."

     "I'm glad of that, Jo, for it shows that you are getting on.
There are plenty to love you, so try to be satisfied with Father
and Mother, sisters and brothers, friends and babies, till the
best lover of all comes to give you your reward."

     "Mothers are the best lovers in the world, but I don't mind
whispering to Marmee that I'd like to try all kinds.  It's very
curious, but the more I try to satisfy myself with all sorts of
natural affections, the more I seem to want.  I'd no idea hearts
could take in so many.  Mine is so elastic, it never seems full
now, and I used to be quite contented with my family.  I don't
understand it."

     "I do."  And Mrs. March smiled her wise smile, as Jo turned
back the leaves to read what Amy said of Laurie.

     "It is so beautiful to be loved as Laurie loves me. He isn't
sentimental, doesn't say much about it, but I see and feel it in
all he says and does, and it makes me so happy and so humble that
I don't seem to be the same girl I was.  I never knew how good and
generous and tender he was till now, for he lets me read his heart,
and I find it full of noble impulses and hopes and purposes, and
am so proud to know it's mine.  He says he feels as if he `could
make a prosperous voyage now with me aboard as mate, and lots of
love for ballast'.  I pray he may, and try to be all he believes
me, for I love my gallant captain with all my heart and soul and
might, and never will desert him, while God lets us be together.
Oh, Mother, I never knew how much like heaven this world could be,
when two people love and live for one another!"

     "And that's our cool, reserved, and worldly Amy!  Truly, love
does work miracles.  How very, very happy they must be!" And Jo
laid the rustling sheets together with a careful hand, as one
might shut the covers of a lovely romance, which holds the reader
fast till the end comes, and he finds himself alone in the work-
aday world again.

     By-and-by Jo roamed away upstairs, for it was rainy, and she
could not walk.  A restless spirit possessed her, and the old
feeling came again, not bitter as it once was, but a sorrowfully
patient wonder why one sister should have all she asked, the other
nothing.  It was not true, she knew that and tried to put it away,
but the natural craving for affection was strong, and Amy's hap-
piness woke the hungry longing for someone to `love with heart
and soul, and cling to while God let them be together'.

     Up in the garret, where Jo's unquiet wanderings ended stood
four little wooden chests in a row, each marked with its owners
name, and each filled with relics of the childhood and girlhood
ended now for all.  Jo glanced into them, and when she came to
her own, leaned her chin on the edge, and stared absently at the
chaotic collection, till a bundle of old exercise books caught
her eye.  She drew them out, turned them over, and relived that
pleasant winter at kind Mrs. Kirke's.  She had smiled at first,
then she looked thoughtful, next sad, and when she came to a
little message written in the Professor's hand, her lips began
to tremble, the books slid out of her lap, and she sat looking
at the friendly words, as they took a new meaning, and touched
a tender spot in her heart.

     "Wait for me, my friend.  I may be a little late, but I shall
surely come."

     "Oh, if he only would!  So kine, so good, so patient with me
always, my dear old Fritz.  I didn't value him half enough when I
had him, but now how I should love to see him, for everyone seems
going away from me, and I'm all alone."

     And holding the little paper fast, as if it were a promise
yet to be fulfilled, Jo laid her head down on a comfortable rag
bag, and cried, as if in opposition to the rain pattering on the
roof.

     Was it all self-pity, loneliness, or low spirits?  Or was it
the waking up of a sentiment which had bided its time as patiently
as its inspirer?  Who shall say?

                    CHAPTER FORTY-THREE

     Jo was alone in the twilight, lying on the old sofa, looking
at the fire, and thinking.  It was her favorite way of spending
the hour of dusk.  No one disturbed her, and she used to lie
there on Beth's little red pillow, planning stories, dreaming
dreams, or thinking tender thoughts of the sister who never seemed
far away.  Her face looked tired, grave, and rather sad, for to-
morrow was her birthday, and she was thinking how fast the years
went by, how old she was getting, and how little she seemed to
have accomplished.  Almost twenty-five, and nothing to show for
it.  Jo was mistaken in that.  There was a good deal to show,
and by-and-by she saw, and was grateful for it.

     "An old maid, that's what I'm to be.  A literary spinster,
with a pen for a spouse, a family of stories for children, and
twenty years hence a morsel of fame, perhaps, when, like poor
Johnson, I'm old and can't enjoy it, solitary, and can't share
it, independent, and don't need it.  Well, I needn't be a sour
saint nor a selfish sinner, and, I dare say, old maids are very
comfortable when they get used to it, but . . ."  And there Jo
sighed, as if the prospect was not inviting.

     It seldom is, at first, and thirty seems the end of all things
to five-and-twenty.  But it's not as bad as it looks, and one can
get on quite happily if one has something in one's self to fall
back upon.  At twenty-five, girls begin to talk about being old
maids, but secretly resolve that they never will be.  At thirty
they say nothing about it, but quietly accept the fact, and if
sensible, console themselves by remembering that they have twenty
more useful, happy years, in which they may be learning to grow
old gracefully.  Don't laugh at the spinsters, dear girls, for
often very tender, tragic romances are hidden away in the hearts
that beat so quietly under the sober gowns, and many silent sac-
rifices of youth, health, ambition, love itself, make the faded
faces beautiful in God's sight.  Even the sad, sour sisters
should be kindly dealt with, because they have missed the sweet-
est part of life, if for no other reason.  And looking at them
with compassion, not contempt, girls in their bloom should re-
member that they too may miss the blossom time.  That rosy cheeks
don't last forever, that silver threads will come in the bonnie
brown hair, and that, by-and-by, kindness and respect will be as
sweet as love and admiration now.

     Gentlemen, which means boys, be courteous to the old maids,
no matter how poor and plain and prim, for the only chivalry
worth having is that which is the readiest to pay deference to
the old, protect the feeble, and serve womankind, regardless of
rank, age, or color.  Just recollect the good aunts who have not
only lectured and fussed, but nursed and petted, too often with-
out thanks, the scrapes they have helped you out of, the tips
they have given you from their small store, the stitches the
patient old fingers have set for you, the steps the willing old
feet have taken, and gratefully pay the dear old ladies the little
attentions that women love to receive as long as they live.  The
bright-eyed girls are quick to see such traits, and will like you
all the better for them, and if death, almost the only power that
can part mother and son, should rob you of yours, you will be sure
to find a tender welcome and maternal cherishing from some Aunt
Priscilla, who has kept the warmest corner of her lonely old heart
for `the best nevvy in the world'.

     Jo must have fallen asleep (as I dare say my reader has dur-
ing this little homily), for suddenly Laurie's ghost seemed to
stand before her, a substantial, lifelike ghost, leaning over her
with the very look he used to wear when he felt a good deal and
didn't like to show it.  But, like Jenny in the ballad . . .

                      She could not think it he,

and lay staring up at him in startled silence, till he stooped
and kissed her.  Then she knew him, and flew up, crying joyfully . ..

     "Oh my Teddy!  Oh my Teddy!"

     "Dear Jo, you are glad to see me, then?"

     "Glad!  My blessed boy, words can't express my gladness.
Where's Amy?"

     "Your mother has got her down at Meg's.  We stopped there by
the way, and there was no getting my wife out of their clutches."

     "Your what?" cried Jo, for Laurie uttered those two words
with an unconscious pride and satisfaction which betrayed him.

     "Oh, the dickens!  Now I've done it."  And he looked so
guilty that Jo was down on him like a flash.

     "You've gone and got married!"

     "Yes, please, but I never will again."  And he went down
upon his knees, with a penitent clasping of hands, and a face
full of mischief, mirth, and triumph.

     "Actually married?"

     "Very much so, thank you."

     "Mercy on us.  What dreadful thing will you do next?"  And
Jo fell into her seat with a gasp.

     "A characteristic, but not exactly complimentary, congrat-
ulation," returned Laurie, still in an abject attitude, but beam-
ing with satisfaction.

     "What can you expect, when you take one's breath away, creep-
ing in like a burglar, and letting cats out of bags like that? Get
up, you ridiculous boy, and tell me all about it."

     "Not a word, unless you let me come in my old place, and
promise not to barricade."

     Jo laughed at that as she had not done for many a long day,
and patted the sofa invitingly, as she said in a cordial tone,
"The old pillow is up garret, and we don't need it now.  So, come
and fess, Teddy."

     "How good it sounds to hear you say `Teddy'! No one ever calls
me that but you."  And Laurie sat down with an air of great content.

     "What does Amy call you?"

     "My lord."

     "That's like her.  Well, you look it."  And Jo's eye plainly
betrayed that she found her boy comelier than ever.

     The pillow was gone, but there was a barricade, nevertheless,
a natural one, raised by time absence, and change of heart.  Both
felt it, and for a minute looked at one another as if that invis-
ible barrier cast a little shadow over them.  It was gone directly
however, for Laurie said, with a vain attempt at dignity . . .

     "Don't I look like a married man and the head of a family?"

     "Not a bit, and you never will.  You've grown bigger and
bonnier, but you are the same scapegrace as ever."

     "Now really, Jo, you ought to treat me with more respect,"
began Laurie, who enjoyed it all immensely.

     "How can I, when the mere idea of you, married and settled,
is so irresistibly funny that I can't keep sober!"  answered Jo,
smiling all over her face, so infectiously that they had another
laugh, and then settled down for a good talk, quite in the plea-
sant old fashion.

     "It's no use your going out in the cold to get Amy, for
they are all coming up presently.  I couldn't wait. I wanted to
be the one to tell you the grand surprise, and have `first skim'
as we used to say when we squabbled about the cream."

     "Of course you did, and spoiled your story by beginning at
the wrong end.  Now, start right, and tell me how it all happened.
I'm pining to know."

     "Well, I did it to please Amy," began Laurie,with a twinkle
that made Jo exclaim . . .

     "Fib number one.  Amy did it to please you.  Go on, and tell
the truth, if you can, sir."

     "Now she's beginning to marm it.  Isn't it jolly to hear her?"
said Laurie to the fire, and the fire glowed and sparkled as if it
quite agreed.  "It's all the same, you know, she and I being one.
We planned to come home with the Carrols, a month or more ago, but
they suddenly changed their minds, and decided to pass another
winter in Paris.  But Grandpa wanted to come home.  He went to please
me, and I couldn't let him go along, neither could I leave Amy, and
Mrs. Carrol had got English notions about chaperons and such non-
sense, and wouldn't let Amy come with us.  So I just settled the
difficulty by saying, `Let's be married, and then we can do as we
like'."

     "Of course you did.  You always have things to suit you."

     "Not always."  And something in Laurie's voice made Jo say
hastily . . .

     "How did you ever get Aunt to agree?"

     "It was hard work, but between us, we talked her over, for we
had heaps of good reasons on our side.  There wasn't time to write
and ask leave, but you all liked it, had consented to it by-and-by,
and it was only `taking time by the fetlock', as my wife says."

     "Aren't we proud of those two word, and don't we like to say
them?" interrupted Jo, addressing the fire in her turn, and watch-
ing with delight the happy light it seemed to kindle in the eyes
that had been so tragically gloomy when she saw them last.

     "A trifle, perhaps, she's such a captivating little woman I
can't help being proud of her.  Well, then Uncle and Aunt were
there to play propriety.  We were so absorbed in one another we
were of no mortal use apart, and that charming arrangement would
make everything easy all round, so we did it."

     "When, where, how?" asked Jo, in a fever of feminine interest
and curiosity, for she could not realize it a particle.

     "Six weeks ago, at the American consul's, in Paris, a very
quiet wedding of course, for even in our happiness we didn't for-
get dear little Beth."

     Jo put her hand in his as he said that, and Laurie gently
smoothed the little red pillow, which he remembered well.

     "Why didn't you let us know afterward?" asked Jo, in a
quieter tone, when they had sat quite still a minute.

     "We wanted to surprise you.  We thought we were coming
directly home, at first, but the dear old gentleman, as soon as
we were married, found he couldn't be ready under a month, at
least, and sent us off to spend our honeymoon wherever we liked.
Amy had once called Valrosa a regular honeymoon home, so we went
there, and were as happy as people are but once in their lives.
My faith!  Wasn't it love among the roses!"

     Laurie seemed to forget Jo for a minute, and Jo was glad of
it, for the fact that he told her these things so freely and so
naturally assured her that he had quite forgiven and forgotten.
She tried to draw away her hand, but as if he guessed the thought
that prompted the half-involuntary impulse, Laurie held it fast,
and said, with a manly gravity she had never seen in him before . . .

     "Jo, dear, I want to say one thing, and then we'll put it by
forever.  As I told you in my letter when I wrote that Amy had
been so kind to me, I never shall stop loving you, but the love
is altered, and I have learned to see that it is better as it is.
Amy and you changed places in my heart, that's all.  I think it
was meant to be so, and would have come about naturally, if I had
waited, as you tried to make me, but I never could be patient, and
so I got a heartache.  I was a boy then, headstrong and violent,
and it took a hard lesson to show me my mistake.  For it was one,
Jo, as you said, and I found it out, after making a fool of myself.
Upon my word, I was so tumbled up in my mind, at one time, that I
didn't know which I loved best, you or Amy, and tried to love you
both alike.  But I couldn't, and when I saw her in Switzerland,
everything seemed to clear up all at once.  You both got into
your right places, and I felt sure that it was well off with the
old love before it was on with the new, that I could honestly
share my heart between sister Jo and wife Amy, and love them dearly.
Will you believe it, and go back to the happy old times when we
first knew one another?"

     "I'll believe it, with all my heart, but, Teddy, we never can
be boy and girl again. The happy old times can't come back, and we
mustn't expect it.  We are man and woman now, with sober work to do,
for playtime is over, and we must give up frolicking. I'm sure you
feel this.  I see the change in you, and you'll find it in me.  I
shall miss my boy, but I shall love the man as much, and admire
him more, because he means to be what I hoped he would.  We can't
be little playmates any longer, but we will be brother and sister,
to love and help one another all our lives, won't we, Laurie?"

     He did not say a word, but took the hand she offered him, and
laid his face down on it for a minute, feeling that out of the
grave of a boyish passion, there had risen a beautiful, strong
friendship to bless them both.  Presently Jo said cheerfully, for
she didn't the coming home to be a sad one, "I can't make it true
that you children are really married and going to set up house-
keeping.  Why, it seems only yesterday that I was buttoning Amy's
pinafore, and pulling your hair when you teased.  Mercy me, how
time does fly!"

     "As one of the children is older than yourself, you needn't
talk so like a grandma.  I flatter myself I'm a `gentleman growed'
as Peggotty said of David, and when you see Amy, you'll find her
rather a precocious infant," said Laurie, looking amused at her
maternal air.

     "You may be a little older in years, but I'm ever so much
older in feeling, Teddy.  Women always are, and this last year has
been such a hard one that I feel forty."

     "Poor Jo!  We left you to bear it alone, while we went plea-
suring.  You are older.  Here's a line, and there's another.  Unless
you smile, your eyes look sad, and when I touched the cushion, just
now, I found a tear on it.  You've had a great deal to bear, and
had to bear it all alone.  What a selfish beast I've been!"  And
Laurie pulled his own hair, with a remorseful look.

     But Jo only turned over the traitorous pillow, and answered,
in a tone which she tried to make more cheerful, "No, I had Father
and Mother to help me, and the dear babies to comfort me, and the
thought that you and Amy were safe and happy, to make the troubles
here easier to bear.  I am lonely, sometimes, but I dare say it's
good for me, and . . ."

     "You never shall be again," broke in Laurie, putting his arm
about her, as if to fence out every human ill. "Amy and I can't
get on without you, so you must come and teach `the children' to
keep house, and go halves in everything, just as we used to do,
and let us pet you, and all be blissfully happy and friendly
together."

     "If I shouldn't be in the way, it would be very pleasant. I
begin to feel quite young already, for somehow all my troubles
seemed to fly away when you came.  You always were a comfort, Teddy."
And Jo leaned her head on his shoulder, just as she did years ago,
when Beth lay ill and Laurie told her to hold on to him.

     He looked down at her, wondering if she remembered the time,
but Jo was smiling to herself, as if in truth her troubles had
all vanished at his coming.

     "You are the same Jo still, dropping tears about one minute,
and laughing the next.  You look a little wicked now.  What is it,
Grandma?"

     "I was wondering how you and Amy get on together."

     "Like angels!"

     "Yes, of course, but which rules?"

     "I don't mind telling you that she does now, at least I let
her think so, it pleases her, you know.  By-and-by we shall take
turns, for marriage, they say, halves one's rights and doubles
one's duties."

     "You'll go on as you begin, and Amy will rule you all the
days of your life."

     "Well, she does it so imperceptibly that I don't think I shall
mind much.  She is the sort of woman who knows how to rule well. In
fact, I rather like it, for she winds one round her finger as softly
and prettily as a skein of silk, and makes you feel as if she was
doing you a favor all the while."

     "That ever I should live to see you a henpecked husband and
enjoying it!" cried JO, with uplifted hands.

     It was good to see Laurie square his shoulders, and smile with
masculine scorn at that insinuation, as he replied, with his "high
and mighty" air, "Amy is too well-bred for that, and I am not the
sort of man to submit to it.  My wife and I respect ourselves and
one another too much ever to tyrannize or quarrel."

     Jo like that, and thought the new dignity very becoming, but
the boy seemed changing very fast into the man, and regret mingled
with her pleasure.

     "I am sure of that.  Amy and you never did quarrel as we used
to.  She is the sun and I the wind, in the fable, and the sun man-
aged the man best, you remember."

     "She can blow him up as well as shine on him," laughed Laurie.
"such a lecture as I got at Nice!  I give you my word it was a deal
worse than any or your scoldings, a regular rouser.  I'll tell you
all about it sometime, she never will, because after telling me that
she despised and was ashamed of me, she lost her heart to the de-
spicable party and married the good-for-nothing."

     "What baseness!  Well, if she abuses you, come to me, and I'll
defend you."

     "I look as if I needed it, don't I?" said Laurie, getting up
and striking an attitude which suddenly changed from the imposing
to the rapturous, as Amy's voice was heard calling, "Where is she?
Where's my dear old Jo?"

     In trooped the whole family, and everyone was hugged and kissed
all over again, and after several vain attempts, the three wanderers
were set down to be looked at and exulted over.  Mr. Laurence, hale
and hearty as ever, was quite as much improved as the others by his
foreign tour, for the crustiness seemed to be nearly gone, and the
old-fashioned courtliness had received a polish which made it kind-
lier than ever.  It was good to see him beam at `my children', as
he called the young pair.  It was better still to see Amy pay him
the daughterly duty and affection which completely won his old heart,
and best of all, to watch Laurie revolve about the two, as if never
tired of enjoying the pretty picture they made.

     The minute she put her eyes upon Amy, Meg became conscious that
her own dress hadn't a Parisian air, that young Mrs. Mofffat would be
entirely eclipsed by young Mrs. Laurence, and that `her ladyship' was
altogether a most elegant and graceful woman.  Jo thought, as she
watched the pair, "How well they look together!  I was right, and
Laurie has found the beautiful, accomplished girl who will become
his home better than clumsy old Jo, and be a pride, not a torment to
him."  Mrs. March and her husband smiled and nodded at each other
with happy faces, for they saw that their youngest had done well,
not only in worldly things,but the better wealth of love, confid-
ence, and happiness.

     For Amy's face was full of the soft brightness which betokens
a peaceful heart, her voice had a new tenderness in it, and the cool,
prim carriage was changed to a gentle dignity, both womanly and win-
ning.  No little affectations marred it, and the cordial sweetness
of her manner was more charming than the new beauty or the old grace,
for it stamped her at once with the unmistakable sign of the true
gentlewoman she had hoped to become.

     "Love has done much for our little girl," said her mother softly.

     "She has had a good example before her all her life, my dear,"
Mr. March whispered back, with a loving look at the worn face and gray
head beside him.

     Daisy found it impossible to keep her eyes off her `pitty aunty',
but attached herself like a lap dog to the wonderful chatelaine full
of delightful charms.  Demi paused to consider the new relationship
before he compromised himself by the rash acceptance of a bribe, which
took the tempting form of a family of wooden bears from Berne.  A flank
movement produced an unconditional surrender, however, for Laurie knew
where to have him.

     "Young man, when I first had the honor of making your acquain-
tance you hit me in the face.  Now I demand the satisfaction of a
gentleman," and with that the tall uncle proceeded to toss and tousle
the small nephew in a way that damaged his philosophical dignity as
much as it delighted his boyish soul.

     "Blest if she ain't in silk from head to foot?  Ain't it a re-
lishin' sight to see her settin' there as fine as a fiddle, anch a happy
procession as filed away into the little dining room!  Mr. March
proudly escorted Mrs. Laurence.  Mrs. March as proudly leaned on
the arm of `my son'.  The old gentleman took Jo, with a whispered,
"You must be my girl now," and a glance at the empty corner by the
fire, that made Jo whisper back, "I'll try to fill her place, sir.

     The twins pranced behind, feeling that the millennium was at
hand, for everyone was so busy with the newcomers that they were
left to revel at their own sweet will, and you may be sure they
made the most of the opportunity.  Didn't they steal sips of tea,
stuff gingerbread ad libitum, get a hot biscuit apiece, and as a
crowning trespass, didn't they each whisk a captivating little tart
into their tiny pockets, there to stick and crumble treacherously,
teaching them that both human nature and a pastry are frail?  Bur-
dened with the guilty consciousness of the sequestered tarts, and
fearing that Dodo's sharp eyes would pierce the thin disguise of
cambric and merino which hid their booty, the little sinners
attached themselves to `Dranpa', who hadn't his spectacles on. Amy,
who was handed about like refreshments, returned to the parlor on
Father Laurence's arm.  The others paired off as before, and this
arrangement left Jo companionless. She did not mind it at the
minute, for she lingered to answer Hannah's eager inquiry.

     "Will Miss Amy ride in her coop (coupe), and use all them
lovely silver dishes that's stored away over yander?"

     "Shouldn't wonder if she drove six white horses, ate off gold
plate, and wore diamonds and point lace every day.  Teddy thinks
nothing too good for her," returned Jo with infinite satisfaction.

     "No more there is!  Will you have hash or fishballs for break-
fast?" asked Hannah, who wisely mingled poetry and prose.

     "I don't care."  And Jo shut the door, feeling that food was an
uncongenial topic just then.  She stood a minute looking at the
party vanishing above, and as Demi's short plaid legs toiled up the
last stair, a sudden sense of lonliness came over her so strongly
that she looked about her with dim eyes, as if to find something to
lean upon, for even Teddy had deserted her.  If she had known what
birthday gift was coming every minute nearer and nearer, she would
not have said to herself, "I'll weep a little weep when I go to bed.
It won't do to be dismal now."  Then she drew her hand over her
eyes, for one of her boyish habits was never to know where her hand-
kerchief was, and had just managed to call up a smile when there
came a knock at the porch door.

     She opened with hospitable haste, and started as if another
ghost had come to surprise her, for there stood a tall bearded
gentleman, beaming on her from the darkness like a midnight sun.

     "Oh, Mr. Bhaer, I am so glad to see you!" cried Jo, with a
clutch, as if she feared the night would swallow him up before
she could get him in.

     "And I to see Miss Marsch, but no, you haf a party," and the
Professor paused as the sound of voices and the tap of dancing
feet came down to them.

     "No, we haven't, only the family.  My sister and friends
have just come home, and we are all very happy.  Come in, and
make one of us."

     Though a very social man, I think Mr. Bhaer would have gone
decorously away, and come again another day, but how could he,
when Jo shut the door behind him, and bereft him of his hat?
Perhaps her face had something to do with it, for she forgot
to hide her joy at seeing him, and showed it with a frankness
that proved irresistible to the solitary man, whose welcome far
exceeded his boldest hopes.

     "If I shall not be Monsieur de Trop, I will so gladly see
them all.  You haf been ill, my friend?"

     He put the question abruptly, for, as Jo hung up his coat,
the light fell on her face, and he saw a change in it.

     "Not ill, but tired and sorrowful.  We have had trouble
since I saw you last."

     "Ah, yes, I know.  My heart was sore for you when I heard
that," And he shook hands again, with such a sympathetic face
that Jo felt as if no comfort could equal the look of the kind
eyes, the grasp of the big, warm hand.

     "Father, Mother, this is my friend, Professor Bhaer," she
said, with a face and tone of such irrepressible pride and
pleasure that she might as well have blown a trumpet and opened
the door with a flourish.

     If the stranger had any doubts about his reception, they
were set at rest in a minute by the cordial welcome he received.
Everyone greeted him kindly, for Jo's sake at first, but very
soon they liked him for his own.  They could not help it, for
he carried the talisman that opens all hearts, and these simple
people warmed to him at once, feeling even the more friendly
because he was poor. For poverty enriches those who live above
it, and is a sure passport to truly hospitable spirits.  Mr.
Bhaer sat looking about him with the air of a traveler who
knocks at a strange door, and when it opens, finds himself at
home.  The children went to him like bees to a honeypot, and
establishing themselves on each knee, proceeded to captivate him
by rifling his pockets, pulling his beard, and investigating his
watch, with juvenile audacity.  The women telegraphed their
approval to one another, and Mr. March, feeling that he had got
a kindred spirit, opened his choicest stores for his guest's
benefit, while silent John listened and enjoyed the talk, but
said not a word, and Mr. Laurence found it impossible to go to
sleep.

     If Jo had not been otherwise engaged, Laurie's behavior
would have amused her, for a faint twinge, not of jealousy, but
something like suspicion, caused that gentleman to stand aloof
at first, and observe the newcomer with brotherly circumspection.
But it did not last long.  He got interested in spite of himself,
and before he knew it, was drawn into the circle.  For Mr. Bhaer
talked well in this genial atmosphere, and did himself justice.
He seldom spoke to Laurie, but he looked at him often, and a
shadow would pass across his face, as if regretting his own lost
youth, as he watched the young man in his prime.  Then his eyes
would turn to Jo so wistfully that she would have surely answered
the mute inquiry if she had seen it.  But Jo had her own eyes to
take care of, and feeling that they could not be trusted, she
prudently kept them on the little sock she was knitting, like a
model maiden aunt.

     A stealthy glance now and then refreshed her like sips of
fresh water after a dusty walk, for the sidelong peeps showed
her several propitious omens.  Mr. Bhaer's face had lost the
absent-minded expression, and looked all alive with interest in
the present moment, actually young and handsome, she thought,
forgetting to compare him with Laurie, as she usually did strange
men, to their great detriment. Then he seemed quite inspired,
though the burial customs of the ancients, to which the conver-
sation had strayed, might not be considered an exhilarating
topic.  Jo quite glowed with triumph when Teddy got quenched in
an argument, and thought to herself, as she watched her father's
absorbed face, "How he would enjoy having such a man as my Pro-
fessor to talk with every day!" Lastly, Mr. Bhaer was dressed
in a new suit of black, which made him look more like a gentleman
than ever.  His bushy hair had been cut and smoothly brushed, but
didn't stay in order long, for in exciting moments, he rumpled
it up in the droll way he used to do, and Jo liked it rampantly
erect better than flat, because she thought it gave his fine
forehead a Jove-like aspect.  Poor Jo, how she did glorify that
plain man, as she sat knitting away so quietly, yet letting
nothing escape her, not even the fact that Mr. Bhaer actually
had gold sleeve-buttons in his immaculate wristbands.

     "Dear old fellow!  He couldn't have got himself up with
more care if he'd been going a-wooing," said Jo to herself, and
then a sudden thought born of the words made her blush so dread-
fully that she had to drop her ball, and go down after it to
hide her face.

     The maneuver did not succeed as well as she expected, how-
ever, for though just in the act of setting fire to a funeral
pyre, the Professor dropped his torch, metaphorically speaking,
and made a dive after the little blue ball.  Of course they
bumped their heads smartly together, saw stars, and both came
up flushed and laughing, without the ball, to resume their seats,
wishing they had not left them.

     Nobody knew where the evening went to, for Hannah skillfully
abstracted the babies at an early hour, nodding like two rosy
poppies, and Mr. Laurence went home to rest.  The others sat
round the fire, talking away, utterly regardless of the lapse
of time, till Meg, whose maternal was impressed with a firm con-
viction that Daisy had tumbled out of be, and Demi set his night-
gown afire studying the structure of matches, made a move to go.

     "We must have our sing, in the good old way, for we are all
together again once more," said Jo, feeling that a good shout
would be a safe and pleasant vent for the jubilant emotions of
her soul.

     They were not all there.  But no one found the words thougt-
less or untrue, for Beth still seemed among them, a peaceful
presence, invisible, but dearer than ever, since death could not
break the household league that love made disoluble.  The little
chair stood in its old place.  The tidy basket, with the bit of
work she left unfinished when the needle grew `so heavy', was
still on its accustomed shelf.  The beloved instrument, seldom
touched now had not been moved, and above it Beth's face, serene
and smiling, as in the early days, looked down upon them, seeming
to say, "Be happy.  I am here."

     "Play something, Amy.  Let them hear how much you have im-
proved," said Laurie, with pardonable pride in his promising
pupil.

     But Amy whispered, with full eyes, as she twirled the faded
stool, "Not tonight, dear.  I can't show off tonight."

     But she did show something better than brilliancy or skill,
for she sang Beth's songs with a tender music in her voice which
the best master could not have taught, and touched the listener's
hearts with a sweeter power than any other inspiration could have
given her.  The room was very still, when the clear voice failed
suddenly at the last line of Beth's favorite hymn.  It was hard
to say . . .

           Earth hath no sorrow that heaven cannot heal;

and Amy leaned against her husband, who stood behind her, feeling
that her welcome home was not quite perfect without Beth's kiss.

     "Now, we must finish with Mignon's song, for Mr. Bhaer sings
that," said Jo, before the pause grew painful.  And Mr. Bhaer
cleared his throat with a gratified "Hem!" as he stepped into the
corner where Jo stood, saying . . .

     "You will sing with me?  We go excellently well together."

     A pleasing fiction, by the way, for Jo had no more idea of
music than a grasshopper.  But she would have consented if he had
proposed to sing a whole opera, and warbled away, blissfully re-
gardless of time and tune.  It didn't much matter, for Mr. Bhaer
sang like a true German, heartily and well, and Jo soon subsided
into a subdued hum, that she might listen to the mellow voice that
seemed to sing for her alone.

         Know'st thou the land where the citron blooms,

used to be the Professor's favorite line, for `das land' meant
Germany to him, but now he seemed to dwell, with peculiar warmth
and melody, upon the words . . .

             There, oh there, might I with thee,
             O, my beloved, go

and one listener was so thrilled by the tender invitation that she
longed to say she did know the land, and would joyfully depart
thither whenever he liked

     The song was considered a great success, and the singer retired
covered with laurels.  But a few minutes afterward, he forgot his
manners entirely, and stared at Amy putting on her bonnet, for she
had been introduced simply as `my sister', and on one had called
her by her new name since her came.  He forgot himself still fur-
ther when Laurie said, in his most gracious manner, at parting . . .

     "My wife and I are very glad to meet you, sir.  Please remem-
ber that there is always a welcome waiting for you over the way."

     Then the Professor thanked him so heartily, and looked so
suddenly illuminated with satisfaction, that Laurie thought him
the most delightfully demonstrative old fellow he ever met.

     "I too shall go, but I shall gladly come again, if you will
gif me leave, dear madame, for a little business in the city will
keep me here some days."

     He spoke to Mrs. March, but he looked at Jo, and the mother's
voice gave as cordial an assent as did the daughter's eyes, for
Mrs. March was not so blind to her children's interest as Mrs.
Moffat supposed.

     "I suspect that is a wise man," remarked Mr. March, with
placid satisfaction, from the hearthrug, after the last guest had
gone.

     "I know he is a good one," added Mrs. March, with decided
approval, as she wound up the clock.

     "I thought you'd like him," was all Jo said, as she slipped
away to her bed.

     She wondered what the business was that brought Mr. Bhaer to
the city, and finally decided that he had been appointed to some
great honor, somewhere, but had been too modest to mention the
fact.  If she had seen his face when, safe in his own room, he
looked at the picture of a severe and rigid young lady, with a
good deal of hair, who appeared to be gazing darkly into futurity,
it might have thrown some light upon the subject, especially when
he turned off the gas, and kissed the picture in the dark.

                    CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR

     "Please, Madam Mother, could you lend me my wife for half
an hour?  The luggage has come, and I've been making hay of
Amy's Paris finery, trying to find some things I want," said
Laurie, coming in the next day to find Mrs. Laurence sitting
in her mother's lap, as if being made `the baby' again.

     "Certainly.  Go, dear, I forgot that you have any home but
this." And Mrs. March pressed the white hand that wore the wed-
ding ring, as if asking pardon for her maternal covetousness.

     "I shouldn't have come over if I could have helped it, but
I can't get on without my little woman any more than a . . ."

     "Weathercock can without the wind," suggested Jo, as he
paused for a simile.  Jo had grown quite her own saucy self
again since Teddy came home.

     "Exactly, for Amy keeps me pointing due west most of the
time, with only an occasional whiffle round to the south, and
I haven't had an easterly spell since I was married.  Don't know
anything about the north, but am altogether salubrious and balmy,
hey, my lady?"

     "Lovely weather so far.  I don't know how long it will last,
but I'm not afraid of storms, for I'm learning how to sail my
ship.  Come home, dear, and I'll find your bootjack.  I suppose
that's what you are rummaging after among my things.  Men are so
helpless, Mother," said Amy, with a matronly air, which delighted
her husband.

     "What are you going to do with yourselves after you get set-
tled?" asked Jo, buttoning Amy's cloak as she used to button her
pinafores.

     "We have our plans.  We don't mean to say much about them
yet, because we are such very new brooms, but we don't intend to
be idle.  I'm going into business with a devotion that shall de-
light Grandfather, and prove to him that I'm not spoiled.  I need
something of the sort to keep me steady.  I'm tired of dawdling,
and mean to work like a man."

     "And Amy, what is she going to do?" asked Mrs. March, well
pleased at Laurie's decision and the energy with which he spoke.

     "After doing the civil all round, and airing our best bonnet,
we shall astonish you by the elegant hospitalities of our mansion,
the brilliant society we shall draw about us, and the beneficial
influence we shall exert over the world at large.  That's about
it, isn't it, Madame Recamier?" asked Laurie with a quizzical
look at Amy.

     "Time will show.  Come away, Impertinence, and don't shock
my family by calling me names before their faces," answered Amy,
resolving that there should be a home with a good wife in it
before she set up a salon as a queen of society.

     "How happy those children seem together!" observed Mr. March,
finding it difficult to become absorbed in his Aristotle after
the young couple had gone.

     "Yes, and I think it will last," added Mrs. March, with the
restful expression of a pilot who has brought a ship safely into
port.

     "I know it will. Happy Amy!" And Jo sighed, then smiled
brightly as Professor Bhaer opened the gate with an impatient
push.

     Later in the evening, when his mind had been set at rest
about the bootjack, Laurie said suddenly to his wife, "Mrs.
Laurence."

     "My Lord!"

     "That man intends to marry our Jo!"

     "I hope so, don't you, dear?"

     "Well, my love, I consider him a trump, in the fullest sense
of that expressive word, but I do wish he was a little younger
and a good deal richer."

     "Now, Laurie, don't be too fastidious and worldly-minded.
If they love one another it doesn't matter a particle how old
they are nor how poor.  Women never should marry for money . . ."
Amy caught herself up short as the words escaped her, and looked
at her husband, who replied, with malicious gravity . . .

     "Certainly not, though you do hear charming girls say that
they intend to do it sometimes.  If my memory serves me, you
once thought it your duty to make a rich match.  That accounts,
perhaps, for your marrying a good-for-nothing like me."

     "Oh, my dearest boy, don't, don't say that!  I forgot you
were rich when I said `Yes'.  I'd have married you if you hadn't
a penny, and I sometimes wish you were poor that I might show
how much I love you."  And Amy, who was very dignified in public
and very fond in private, gave convincing proofs of the truth of
her words.

     "You don't really think I am such a mercenary creature as
I tried to be once, do you?  It would break my heart if you
didn't believe that I'd gladly pull in the same boat with you,
even if you had to get your living by rowing on the lake."2

     "Am I an idiot and a brute?  How could I think so, when
you refused a richer man for me, and won't let me give you half
I want to now, when I have the right?  Girls do it every day,
poor things, and are taught to think it is their only salvation,
but you had better lessons, and though I trembled for you at
one time, I was not disappointed, for the daughter was true to
the mother's teaching.  I told Mamma so yesterday, and she
looked as glad and grateful as if I'd given her a check for a
million, to be spent in charity.  You are not listening to my
moral remarks, Mrs. Laurence."  And Laurie paused, for Amy's
eyes had an absent look, though fixed upon his face.

     "Yes, I am, and admiring the mple in your chin at the
same time.  I don't wish to make you vain, but I must confess
that I'm prouder of my handsome husband than of all his money.
Don't laugh, but your nose is such a comfort to me." And Amy
softly caressed the well-cut feature with artistic satisfaction.

     Laurie had received many compliments in his life, but never
one that suited him better, as he plainly showed though he did
laugh at his wife's peculiar taste, while she said slowly, "May
I ask you a question, dear?"

     "Of course, you may."

     "Shall you care if Jo does marry Mr. Bhaer?"

     "Oh, that's the trouble is it?  I thought there was something
in the dimple that didn't quite suit you.  Not being a dog in the
manger, but the happiest fellow alive, I assure you I can dance
at Jo's wedding with a heart as light as my heels.  Do you doubt
it, my darling?"

     Amy looked up at him, and was satisfied.  Her little jealous
fear vanished forever, and she thanked him, with a face full of
love and confidence.

     "I wish we could do something for that capital old Professor.
Couldn't we invent a rich relation, who shall obligingly die out
there in Germany, and leave him a tidy little fortune?" said Laurie,
when they began to pace up and down the long drawing room, arm in
arm, as they were fond of doing, in memory of the chateau garden.

     "Jo would find us out, and spoil it all.  She is very proud
of him, just as he is, and said yesterday that she thought pov-
erty was a beautiful thing."

     "Bless her dear heart!  She won't think so when she has a
literary husband, and a dozen little professors and professorins
to support.  We won't interfere now, but watch our chance, and
do them a good turn in spite of themselves.  I owe Jo for a part
of my education, and she believes in people's paying their hon-
est debts, so I'll get round her in that way."

     "How delightful it is to be able to help others, isn't it?
That was always one of my dreams, to have the power of giving
freely, and thanks to you, the dream has come true."

     "Ah, we'll do quantities of good, won't we?  There's one
sort of poverty that I particularly like to help.  Out-and-out
beggars get taken care of, but poor gentle folks fare badly,
because they won't ask, and people don't dare to offer charity.
Yet there are a thousand ways of helping them, if one only
knows how to do it so delicately that it does not offend.   I
must say, I like to serve a decayed gentleman better than a
blarnerying beggar.  I suppose it's wrong, but I do, though it
is harder."

     "Because it takes a gentleman to do it," added the other
member of the domestic admiration society.

     "Thank you, I'm afraid I don't deserve that pretty compliment.
But I was going to say that while I was dawdling about abroad, I
saw a good many talented young fellows making all sorts of sac-
rifices, and enduring real hardships, that they might realize
their dreams.  Splendid fellows, some of them, working like heros,
poor and friendless, but so full of courage, patience, and am-
bition that I was ashamed of myself, and longed to give them a
right good lift.  Those are people whom it's a satisfaction to
help, for if they've got genius, it's an honor to be allowed to
serve them, and not let it be lost or delayed for want of fuel
to keep the pot boiling.  If they haven't, it's a pleasure to
comfort the poor souls, and keep them from despair when they find
it out."

     "Yes, indeed, and there's another class who can't ask, and
who suffer in silence.  I know something of it, for I belonged to
it before you made a princess of me, as the king does the beggar-
maid in the old story.  Ambitious girls have a hard time, Laurie,
and often have to see youth, health, and precious opportunities
go by, just for want of a little help at the right minute. People
have been very kind to me, and whenever I see girls struggling
along, as we used to do, I want to put out my hand and help them,
as I was helped."

     "And so you shall, like an angel as you are!" cried Laurie,
resolving, with a glow of philanthropic zeal, to found and en-
dow an institution for the express benefit of young women with
artistic tendencies.  "Rich people have no right to sit down
and enjoy themselves, or let their money accumulate for others
to waste.  It's not half so sensible to leave legacies when one
dies as it is to use the money wisely while alive, and enjoy
making one's fellow creatures happy with it.  We'll have a good
time ourselves, and add an extra relish to our own pleasure by
giving other people a generous taste.  Will you be a little
Dorcal, going about emptying a big basket of comforts, and
filling it up with good deeds?"

     "With all my heart, if you will be a brave St. Martin,
stopping as you ride gallantly through the world to share your
cloak with the beggar."

     "It's a bargain, and we shall get the best of it!"

     So the young pair shook hands upon it, and then paced
happily on again, feeling that their pleasant home was more
homelike because they hoped to brighten other homes, believing
that their own feet would walk more uprightly along the flowery
path before them, if they smoothed rough ways for other feet,
and feeling that their hearts were more closely knit together
by a love which could tenderly remember those less blest than
they.

                    CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE

     I cannot feel that I have done my duty as humble historian
of the March family, without devoting at least one chapter to
the two most precious and important members of it.  Daisy and
Demi had now arrived at years of discretion, for in this fast
age babies of three or four assert their rights, and get them,
too, which is more than many of their elders do.  If there
ever were a pair of twins in danger of being utterly spoiled
by adoration, it was these prattling Brookes.  Of course they
were the most remarkable children ever born, as will be shown
when I mention that they walked at eight months, talked flu-
ently at twelve months, and at two years they took their places
at table, and behaved with a propriety which charmed all be-
holders.  At three, Daisy demanded a `needler', and actually
made a bag with four stitches in it.  She likewise set up
housekeeping in the sideboard, and managed a microscopic cook-
ing stove with a skill that brought tears of pride to Hannah's
eyes, while Demi learned his letters with his grandfather, who
invented a new mode of teaching the alphabet by forming letters
with his arms and legs, thus uniting gymnastics for head and
heels.  The boy early developed a mechanical genius which de-
lighted his father and distracted his mother, for he tried to
imitate every machine he saw, and kept the nursery in a chaotic
condition, with his `sewinsheen', a mysterious structure of
string, chairs, clothespins, and spools, for wheels to go
`wound and wound'.  Also a basket hung over the back of a chair,
in which he vainly tried to hoist his too confiding sister, who,
with feminine devotion, allowed her little head to be bumped till
rescued, when the young inventor indignantly remarked, "Why,
Marmar, dat's my lellywaiter, and me's trying to pull her up."

     Though utterly unlike in character, the twins got on re-
markably well together, and seldom quarreled more than thrice
a day.  Of course, Demi tyrannized over Daisy, and gallantly
defended her from every other aggressor, while Daisy made a
galley slave of herself, and adored her brother as the one per-
fect being in the world.  A rosy, chubby, sunshiny little soul
was Daisy, who found her way to everybody's heart, and nestled
there.  One of the captivating children, who seem made to be
kissed and cuddled, adorned and adored like little goddesses,
and produced for general approval on all festive occasions.
Her small virtues were so sweet that she would have been quite
angelic if a few small naughtinesses had not kept her delight-
fully human.  It was all fair weather in her world, and every
morning she scrambled up to the window in her little nightgown
to look our, and say, no matter whether it rained or shone,
"Oh, pitty day, oh, pitty day!" Everyone was a friend, and she
offered kisses to a stranger so confidingly that the most in-
veterate bachelor relented, and baby-lovers became faithful
worshipers.

     "Me loves evvybody," she once said, opening her arms, with
her spoon in one hand, and her mug in the other, as if eager to
embrace and nourish the whole world.

     As she grew, her mother began to feel that the Dovecote
would be blessed by the presence of an inmate as serene and lov-
ing as that which had helped to make the old house home, and to
pray that she might be spared a loss like that which had lately
taught them how long they had entertained an angel unawares. Her
grandfather often called her `Beth', and her grandmother watched
over her with untiring devotion, as if trying to atone for some
past mistake, which no eye but her own could see.

     Demi, like a true Yankee, was of an inquiring turn, wanting
to know everything, and often getting much disturbed because he
could not get satisfactory answers to his perpetual "What for?"

     He also possessed a philosophic bent, to the great delight of
his grandfather, who used to hold Socratic conversations with him,
in which the precocious pupil occasionally posed his teacher, to
the undisguised satisfaction of the womenfolk.

     "What makes my legs go, Dranpa?" asked the young philosopher,
surveying those active portions of his frame with a meditative air,
while resting after a go-to-bed frolic one night.

     "It's your little mind, Demi," replied the sage, stroking the
yellow head respectfully.

     "What is a little mine?"

     "It is something which makes your body move, as the spring
made the wheels go in my watch when I showed it to you."

     "Open me.  I want to see it go wound."

     "I can't do that any more than you could open the watch. God
winds you up, and you go till He stops you."

     "Does I?" And Demi's brown eyes grew big and bright as he
took in the new thought.  "Is I wounded up like the watch?"

     "Yes, but I can't show you how, for it is done when we don't
see."

     Demi felt his back, as if expecting to find it like that of
the watch, and then gravely remarked, "I dess Dod does it when
I's asleep."

     A careful explanation followed, to which he listened so at-
tentively that his anxious grandmother said, "My dear, do you
think it wise to talk about such things to that baby?  He's get-
ting great bumps over his eyes, and learning to ask the most
unanswerable questions."

     "If he is old enough to ask the question he is old enough to
receive true answers.  I am not putting the thoughts into his
head, but helping him unfold those already there.  These children
are wiser than we are, and I have no doubt the boy understands
every word I have said to him.  Now, Demi, tell me where you keep
your mind."

     If the boy had replied like Alcibiades, "By the gods, Socrates,
I cannot tell," his grandfather would not have been surprised, but
when, after standing a moment on one leg, like a meditative young
stork, he answered, in a tone of calm conviction, "In my little
belly," the old gentleman could only join in Grandma's laugh, and
dismiss the class in metaphysics.

     There might have been cause for maternal anxiety, if Demi had
not given convincing proofs that he was a true boy, as well as a
budding philosopher, for often, after a discussion which caused
Hannah to prophesy, with ominous nods, "That child ain't long for
this world," he would turn about and set her fears at rest by
some of the pranks with which dear, dirty, naughty little rascals
distract and delight their parent's souls.

     Meg made many moral rules, and tried to keep them, but what
mother was ever proof against the winning wiles, the ingenious
evasions, or the tranquil audacity of the miniature men and women
who so early show themselves accomplished Artful Dodgers?

     "No more raisins, Demi.  They'll make you sick," says Mamma
to the young person who offers his services in the kitchen with
unfailing regularity on plum-pudding day.

     "Me likes to be sick."

     "I don't want to have you, so run away and help Daisy make
patty cakes."

     He reluctantly departs, but his wrongs weigh upon his spirit,
and by-and-by when an opportunity comes to redress them, he out-
wits Mamma by a shrewd bargain.

     "Now you have been good children, and I'll play anything you
like," says Meg, as she leads her assistant cooks upstairs, when
the pudding is safely bouncing in the pot.

     "Truly, Marmar?" asks Demi, with a brilliant idea in his well-
powdered head.

     "Yes, truly.  Anything you say," replies the shortsighted par-
ent, preparing herself to sing, "The Three Little Kittens" half a
dozen times over, or to take her family to "Buy a penny bun," re-
gardless of wind or limb.  But Demi corners her by the cool reply...

     "Then we'll go and eat up all the raisins."

     Aunt Dodo was chief playmate and confidante of both children,
and the trio turned the little house topsy-turvy.  Aunt Amy was as
yet only a name to them, Aunt Beth soon faded into a pleasantly
vague memory, but Aunt Dodo was a living reality, and they made the
most of her, for which compliment she was deeply grateful.  But
when Mr. Bhaer came, Jo neglected her playfellows, and dismay and
desolation fell upon their little souls.  Daisy, who was fond of
going about peddling kisses, lost her best customer and became
bankrupt.  Demi, with infantile penetration, soon discovered that
Dodo like to play with `the bear-man' better than she did him,
but though hurt, he concealed his anguish, for he hadn't the
heart to insult a rival who kept a mine of chocolate drops in
his waistcoat pocket, and a watch that could be taken out of its
case and freely shaken by ardent admirers.

     Some persons might have considered these pleasing liberties
as bribes, but Demi didn't see it in that light, and continued to
patronize the `the bear-man' with pensive affability, while Daisy
bestowed her small affections upon him at the third call, and
considered his shoulder her throne, his arm her refuge, his gifts
treasures surpassing worth.

     Gentlemen are sometimes seized with sudden fits of admiration
for the young relatives of ladies whom they honor with their regard,
but this counterfeit philoprogenitiveness sits uneasily upon them,
and does not deceive anybody a particle.  Mr. Bhaer's devotion was
sincere, however likewise effective--for honesty is the best policy
in love as in law.  He was one of the men who are at home with chil-
dren, and looked particularly well when little faces made a pleasant
contrast with his manly one.  His business, whatever it was, detained
him from day to day, but evening seldom failed to bring him out to
see--well, he always asked for Mr. March, so I suppose he was the
attraction.  The excellent papa labored under the delusion that he
was, and reveled in long discussions with the kindred spirit, till
a chance remark of his more observing grandson suddenly enlightened
him.

     Mr. Bhaer came in one evening to pause on the threshold of the
study, astonished by the spectacle that met his eye.  Prone upon
the floor lay Mr. March, with his respectable legs in the air, and
beside him, likewise prone, was Demi, trying to imitate the atti-
tude with his own short, scarlet-stockinged legs, both grovelers
so seriously absorbed that they were unconscious of spectators,
till Mr. Bhaer laughed his sonorous laugh, and Jo cried out, with
a scandalized face . . .

     "Father, Father, here's the Professor!"

     Down went the black legs and up came the gray head, as the
preceptor said, with undisturbed dignity, "Good evening, Mr. Bhaer.
Excuse me for a moment.  We are just finishing our lesson.  Now,
Demi, make the letter and tell its name."

     "I knows him!" And, after a few convulsive efforts, the red
legs tok the shape of a pair of compasses, and the intelligent
pupil triumphantly shouted, "It's a We, Dranpa, it's a We!"

     "He's a born Weller," laughed Jo, as her parent gathered him-
self up, and her nephew tried to stand on his head, as the only
mode of expressing his satisfaction that school was over.

     "What have you been at today, bubchen?" asked Mr. Bhaer, pick-
ing up the gymnast.

     "Me went to see little Mary."

     "And what did you there?"

     "I kissed her," began Demi, with artless frankness.

     "Prut!  Thou beginnest early.  What did the little Mary say
to that?" asked Mr. Bhaer, continuing to confess the young sinner,
who stood upon the knee, exploring the waistcoat pocket.

     "Oh, she liked it, and she kissed me, and I liked it.  Don't
little boys like little girls?" asked Demi, with his mouth full,
and an air of bland satisfaction.

     "You precious chick!  Who put that into your head?" said Jo,
enjoying the innocent revelation as much as the Professor.

     "`Tisn't in mine head, it's in mine mouf," answered literal
Demi, putting out his tongue, with a chocolate drop on it, think-
ing she alluded to confectionery, not ideas.

     "Thou shouldst save some for the little friend.  Sweets to
the sweet, mannling." And Mr. Bhaer offered Jo some, with a look
that made her wonder if chocolate was not the nectar drunk by the
gods.  Demi also saw the smile, was impressed by it, and artlessy
inquired. ..

     "Do great boys like great girls, to, 'Fessor?"

     Like young Washington, Mr. Bhaer `couldn't tell a lie', so
he gave the somewhat vague reply that he believed they did some-
times,in a tone that made Mr. March put down his clothesbrush,
glance at Jo's retiring face, and then sink into his chair, look-
ing as if the `precocious chick' had put an idea into his head
that was both sweet and sour.

     Why Dodo, when she caught him in the china closet half an
hour afterward, nearly squeezed the breath out of his little body
with a tender embrace, instead of shaking him for being there,
and why she followed up this novel performance by the unexpected
gift of a big slice of bread and jelly, remained one of the prob-
lems over which Demi puzzled his small wits, and was forced to
leave unsolved forever.

                      CHAPTER FORTY-SIX

     While Laurie and Amy were taking conjugal strolls over velvet
carpets, as they set their house in order, and planned a blissful
future, Mr. Bhaer and Jo were enjoying promenades of a different
sort, along muddy roads and sodden fields.

     "I always do take a walk toward evening, and I don't know
why I should give it up, just because I happen to meet the Pro-
fessor on his way out," said Jo to herself, after two or three
encounters, for though there were two paths to Meg's whichever
one she took she was sure to meet him., either going or return-
ing.  He was always walking rapidly, and never seemed to see her
until quite close, when he would look as if his short-sighted
eyes had failed to recognize the approaching lady till that
moment.  Then, if she was going to Meg's he always had something
for the babies.  If her face was turned homeward, he had merely
strolled down to see the river, and was just returning, unless
they were tired of his frequent calls.

     Under the circumstances, what could Jo do but greet him
civilly, and invite him in?  If she was tired of his visits, she
concealed her weariness with perfect skill,and took care that
there should be coffee for supper, "as Friedrich--I mean Mr.
Bhaer--doesn't like tea."

     By the second week, everyone knew perfectly well what was
going on, yet everyone tried to look as if they were stone-blind
to the changes in Jo's face.  They never asked why she sang about
her work, did up her hair three times a day, and got so blooming
with her evening exercise.  And no one seemed to have the slight-
est suspicion that Professor Bhaer, while talking philosophy with
the father, was giving the daughter lessons in love.

     Jo couldn't even lose her heart in a decorous manner, but
sternly tried to quench her feelings, and failing to do so, led
a somewhat agitated life.  She was mortally afraid of being laughed
at for surrendering, after her many and vehement declarations of
independence.  Laurie was her especial dread, but thanks to the
new manager, he behaved with praiseworthy propriety, never called
Mr. Bhaer `a capital old fellow' in public, never alluded, in the
remotest manner, to Jo's improved appearance, or expressed the
least surprise at seeing the Professor's hat on the Marches' table
nearly every evening.  But he exulted in private and longed for
the time to come when he could give Jo a piece of plate, with a
bear and a ragged staff on it as an appropriate coat of arms.

     For a fortnight, the Professor came and went with lover-like
regularity.  Then he stayed away for three whole days, and made
no sign, a proceeding which caused everybody to look sober, and
Jo to become pensive, at first, and then--alas for romance--very
cross.

     "Disgusted, I dare say, and gone home as suddenly as he came.
It's nothing tome, of course, but I should think he would have
come and bid us goodbye like a gentleman," she said to herself,
with a despairing look at the gate, as she put on her things for
the customary walk one dull afternoon.

     "You'd better take the little umbrella, dear.  It looks like
rain," said her mother, observing that she had on her new bonnet,
but not alluding to the fact.

     "Yes, Marmee, do you want anything in town?  I've got to
run in and get some paper," returned Jo, pulling out the bow
under her chin before the glass as an excuse for not looking at
her mother.

     "Yes, I want some twilled silesia, a paper of number nine
needles, and two yards of narrow lavender ribbon.  Have you got
your thick boots on, and something warm under your cloak?"

     "I believe so," answered Jo absently.

     "If you happen to meet Mr. Bhaer, bring him home to tea.
I quite long to see the dear man," added Mrs. March.

     Jo heard that, but made no answer, except to kiss her mother,
and walk rapidly away, thinking with a glow of gratitude, in spite
of her heartache, "How good she is to me! What do girls do who
haven't any mothers to help them through their troubles?"

     The dry-goods stores were not down among the counting-houses,
banks, and wholesale warerooms, where gentlemen most do congregate,
but Jo found herself in that part of the city before she did a
single errand, loitering along as if waiting for someone, examin-
ing engineering instruments in one window and samples of wool in
another, with most unfeminine interest, tumbling over barrels,
being half-smothered by descending bales, and hustled unceremon-
iously by busy men who looked as if they wondered `how the deuce
she got there'.  A drop of rain on her cheek recalled her thoughts
from baffled hopes to ruined ribbons.  For the drops continued to
fall, and being a woman as well as a lover, she felt that, though
it was too late to save her heart, she might her bonnet.  Now she
remembered the little umbrella, which she had forgotten to take
in her hurry to be off, but regret was unavailing, and nothing
could be done but borrow one or submit to to a drenching.  She
looked up at the lowering sky, down at the crimson bow already
flecked with black, forward along the muddy street, then one
long, lingering look behind, at a certain grimy warehouse, with
`Hoffmann, Swartz, & Co.' over the door, and said to herself,
with a sternly reproachful air...

     "It serves me right! what business had I to put on all my
best things and come philandering down here, hoping to see the
Professor?  Jo, I'm ashamed of you!  No, you shall not go there
to borrow an umbrella, or find out where he is, from his friends.
You shall trudge away, and do your errands in the rain, and if
you catch your death and ruin your bonnet, it's no more than
you deserve.  Now then!"

     With that she rushed across the street so impetuously that
she narrowly escaped annihilation from a passing truck,and pre-
cipitated herself into the arms of a stately old gentleman, who
said, "I beg pardon, ma'am," and looked mortally offended.  Some-
what daunted, Jo righted herself, spread her handkerchief over
the devoted ribbons, and putting temptation behind her, hurried on,
with increasing dampness about the ankles, and much clashing of
umbrellas overhead.  The fact that a somewhat dilapidated blue
one remained stationary above the unprotected bonnet attracted
her attention, and looking up, she saw Mr. Bhaer looking down.

     "I feel to know the strong-minded lady who goes so bravely
under many horse noses, and so fast through much mus.  What do
you down here, my friend?"

     "I'm shopping."

     Mr. Bhaer smiled, as he glanced from the pickle factory on
one side to the wholesale hide and leather concern on the other,
but her only said politely, "You haf no umbrella.  May I go also,
and take for you the bundles?"

     "Yes, thank you."

     Jo's cheeks were as red as her ribbon, and she wondered what
he thought of her, but she didn't care, for in a minute she found
herself walking away arm in arm with her Professor, feeling as if
the sun had suddenly burst out with uncommon brilliancy, that
the world was all right again, and that one thoroughly happy woman
was paddling through the wet that day.

     "We thought you had gone," said Jo hastily, for she knew he
was looking at her.  Her bonnet wasn't big enough to hide her face,
and she feared he might think the joy it betrayed unmaidenly.

     "Did you believe that I should go with no farewell to those
who haf been so heavenly kind tome?" he asked so reproachfully
that she felt as if she had insulted him by the suggestion, and
answered heartily . . .

     "No, I didn't.  I knew you were busy about your own affairs,
but we rather missed you, Father and Mother especially."

     "And you?"

     "I'm always glad to see you, sir."

     In her anxiety to keep her voice quite calm, Jo made it rather
cool, and the frosty little monosyllable at the end seemed to chill
the Professor, for his smile vanished, as he said gravely . . .

     "I thank you, and come one more time before I go."

     "You are going, then?"

     "I haf no longer any business here, it is done."

     "Successfully, I hope?" said Jo, for the bitterness of dis-
appointment was in that short reply of his.

     "I ought to think so, for I haf a way opened to me by which
I can make my bread and gif my Junglings much help."

     "Tell me, please!  I like to know all about the--the boys,"
said Jo eagerly.

     "That is so kind, I gladly tell you.  My friends find for me
a place in a college, where I teach as at home, and earn enough
to make the way smooth for Franz and Emil.  For this I should be
grateful, should I not?"

     "Indeed you should.  How splendid it will be to have you
doing what you like, and be able to see you often, and the boys!"
cried Jo, clinging to the lads as an excuse for the satisfaction
she could not help betraying.

     "Ah!  But we shall not meet often, I fear, this place is at
the West."

     "So far away!" And Jo left her skirts to their fate, as if
it didn't matter now what became of her clothes or herself.

     Mr. Bhaer could read several languages, but he had not
learned to read women yet.  He flattered himself that he knew
Jo pretty well, and was, therefore, much amazed by the contra-
dictions of voice, face, and manner, which she showed him in
rapid succession that day, for she was in half a dozen different
moods in the course of half an hour.  When she met him she looked
surprised, though it was impossible to help suspecting that she
had come for that express purpose.  When he offered her his arm,
she took it with a look that filled him with delight, but when
he asked if she missed him, she gave such a chilly, formal reply
that despair fell upon him.  On learning his good fortune she
almost clapped her hands.  Was the joy all for the boys?  Then
on hearing his destination, she said, "So far away!" in a tone
of despair that lifted him on to a pinnacle of hope, but the
next minute she tumbled him down again by observing, like one
entirely absorbed in the matter...

     "Here's the place for my errands.  Will you come in? It
won't take long."

     Jo rather prided herself upon her shopping capabilities,
and particularly wished to impress her escort with the neat-
ness and dispatch with which she would accomplish the business.
But owing to the flutter she was in, everything went amiss.
She upset the tray of needles, forgot the silesia was to be
`twilled' till it was cut off, gave the wrong change, and
covered herself with confusion by asking for lavender ribbon
at the calico counter.  Mr. Bhaer stood by, watching her blush
and blunder, and as he watched, his own bewilderment seemed to
subside, for he was beginning to see that on some occasions,
women,like dreams, go by contraries.

     When they came out, he put the parcel under his arm with
a more cheerful aspect, and splashed through the puddles as if
he rather enjoyed it on the whole.

     "Should we no do a little what you call shopping for the
babies, and haf a farewell feast tonight if I go for my last
call at your so pleasant home?" he asked, stopping before a
window full of fruit and flowers.

     "What will we buy?" asked Jo, ignoring the latter part of
his speech, and sniffing the mingled odors with an affectation
of delight as they went in.

     "May they haf oranges and figs?" asked Mr. Bhaer, with a
paternal air.

     "They eat them when they can get them."

     "Do you care for nuts?"

     "Like a squirrel."

     "Hamburg grapes.  Yes, we shall drink to the Fatherland in
those?"

     Jo frowned upon that piece of extravagance, and asked why
he didn't buy a frail of dated, a cask of raisins, and a bag of
almonds, and be done with it?  Whereat Mr. Bhaer confiscated her
purse, produced his own, and finished the marketing by buying
several pounds of grapes, a pot of rosy daisies, and a pretty
jar of honey, to be regarded in the light of a demijohn.  Then
distorting his pockets with knobby bundles,and giving her the
flowers to hold, he put up the old umbrella, and they traveled
on again.

     "Miss Marsch, I haf a great favor to ask of you," began the
Professor, after a moist promenade of half a block.

     "Yes, sir." And Jo's heart began to beat so hard she was
afraid he would hear it.

     "I am bold to say it in spite of the rain, because so short
a time remains to me."

     "Yes, sir."  And Jo nearly crushed the small flowerpot with
the sudden squeeze she gave it.

     "I wish to get a little dress for my Tina, and I am too stupid
to go alone.  Will you kindly gif me a word of taste and help?"

     "Yes, sir." And JO felt as calm and cool all of a sudden as if
she had stepped into a refrigerator.

     "Perhaps also a shawl for Tina's mother, she is so poor and sick,
and the husband is such a care.  Yes, yes, a thick, warm shawl
would be a friendly thing to take the little mother."

     "I'll do it with pleasure, Mr. Bhaer.  I'm going very fast,
and he's getting dearer every minute," added Jo to herself, then
with a mental shake she entered into the business with an energy
that was pleasant to behold.

     Mr. Bhaer left it all to her, so she chose a pretty gown for
Tina, and then ordered out the shawls.  The clerk, being a married
man, condescended to take an interest in the couple, who appeared
to be shopping for their family.

     "Your lady may prefer this.  It's a superior article, a most
desirable color, quite chaste and genteel," he said, shaking out
a comfortable gray shawl, and throwing it over Jo's shoulders.

     "Does this suit you, Mr. Bhaer?" she asked, turning her
back to him, and feeling deeply grateful for the chance of hiding
her face.

     "Excellently well, we will haf it," answered the Professor,
smiling to himself as he paid for it, while Jo continued to
rummage the counters like a confirmed bargain-hunter.

     "Now shall we go home?" he asked, as if the words were
very pleasant to him.

     "Yes, it's late, and I'm so tired." Jo's voice was more
pathetic than she knew.  For now the sun seemed to have gone
in as suddenly as it came out, and the world grew muddy and
miserable again, and for the first time she discovered that her
feet were cold, her head ached, and that her heart was colder
than the former, fuller of pain than the latter.   Mr. Bhaer
was going away, he only cared for her as a friend, it was all
a mistake, and the sooner it was over the better.  With this
idea in her head, she hailed an approaching omnibus with such
a hasty gesture that the daisies flew out of the pot and were
badly damaged.

     "This is not our omniboos," said the Professor, waving the
loaded vehicle away, and stopping to pick up the poor little
flowers.

     "I beg your pardon.  I didn't see the name distinctly. Never
mind, I can walk.  I'm used to plodding in the mud," returned Jo,
winking hard, because she would have died rather than openly
wipe her eyes.
     MR. Bhaer saw the drops on her cheeks, though she turned her
head away.  The sight seemed to touch him very much, for suddenly
stooping down, he asked in a tone that meant a great deal, "Heart's
dearest, why do you cry?"

     Now, if Jo had not been new to this sort of thing she would
have said she wasn't crying, had a cold in her head, or told
any other feminine fib proper to the occasion.  Instead of which,
that undignified creature answered, with an irrepressible sob,
"Because you are going away."

     "Ach, mein Gott, that is so good!" cried Mr. Bhaer, managing
to clasp his hands in spite of the umbrella and the bundles, "Jo,
I haf nothing but much love to gif you.  I came to see if you
could care for it, and I waited to be sure that I was something
more than a friend.  Am I?  Can you make a little place in your
heart for old Fritz?" he added, all in one breath.

     "Oh, yes!" said Jo, and he was quite satisfied, for she
folded both hands over his are, and looked up at him with an
expression that plainly showed how happy she would be to walk
through life beside him, even though she had no better shelter
than the old umbrella, if he carried it.

     It was certainly proposing under difficulties, for even if
he had desired to do so, Mr. Bhaer could not go down upon his
knees, on account of the mud.  Neither could he offer Jo his
hand, except figuratively, for both were full.  Much less could
he indulge in tender remonstrations in the open street, though
he was near it.  So the only way in which he could express his
rapture was to look at her, with an expression which glorified
his face to such a degree that there actually seemed to be
little rainbows in the drops that sparkled on his beard.  If
he had not loved Jo very much, I don't think he could have done
it then, for she looked far from lovely, with her skirts in a
deplorable state, her rubber boots splashed to the ankle, and
her bonnet a ruin.  Fortunately, Mr. Bhaer considered her the
most beautiful woman living, and she found him more `Jove-like"
than ever, though his hatbrim was quite limp with the little
rills trickling thence upon his shoulders (for he held the
umbrella all over Jo), and every finger of his gloves needed
mending.

     Passers-by probably thought them a pair of harmless lun-
atics, for they entirely forgot to hail a bus, and strolled
leisurely along, oblivious of deepening dusk and fog.  Little
they cared what anybody thought, for they were enjoying the
happy hour that seldom comes but once in any life, the magi-
cal moment which bestows youth on the old, beauty on the plain,
wealth on the poor, and gives human hearts a foretaste of heaven.
The Professor looked as if he had conquered a kingdom, and the
world had nothing more to offer him in the way of bliss.  While
Jo trudged beside him, feeling as if her place had always been
there, and wondering how she ever could have chosen any other
lot.  Of course, she was the first to speak--intelligibly, I
mean, for the emotional remarks which followed her impetuous
"Oh, yes!" were not of a coherent or reportable character.

     "Friedrich, why didn't you . . ."

     "Ah, heaven, she gifs me the name that no one speaks since
Minna died!" cried the Professor, pausing in a puddle to regard
her with grateful delight.

     "I always call you so to myself--I forgot, but I won't unless
you like it."

     "Like it?  It is more sweet to me than I can tell.  Say `thou',
also, and I shall say your language is almost as beautiful as mine."

     "Isn't `thou' a little sentimental?" asked Jo, privately think-
ing it a lovely monosyllable.

     "Sentimental? Yes. Thank Gott, we Germans believe in sentiment,
and keep ourselves young mit it.  Your English `you' is so cold, say
`thou', heart's dearest, it means so much to me," pleaded Mr. Bhaer,
more like a romantic student than a grave professor.

     "Well, then, why didn't thou tell me all this sooner?" asked
Jo bashfully.

     "Now I shall haf to show thee all my heart, and I so gladly
will, because thou must take care of it hereafter.  See, then, my
Jo--ah, the dear, funny little name--I had a wish to tell some-
thing the day I said goodbye in New York, but I thought the hand-
some friend was betrothed to thee, and so I spoke not. Wouldst
thou have said `Yes', then, if I had spoken?"

     "I don't know.  I'm afraid not, for I didn't have any heart
just then."

     "Prut!  That I do not believe.  It was asleep till the fairy
prince came through the wood, and waked it up.  Ah, well, `Die
erste Liebe ist die beste', but that I should not expect."

     "Yes, the first love is the best, but be so contented, for I
never had another.  Teddy was only a boy, and soon got over his
little fancy," said Jo, anxious to correct the Professor's mis-
take.

    "Good!  Then I shall rest happy, and be sure that thou givest
me all.  I haf waited so long, I am grown selfish, as thou wilt
find , Professorin."

     "I like that," cried Jo, delighted with her new name. "Now
tell me what brought you, at last, just when I wanted you?"

     "This." And Mr. Bhaer took a little worn paper out of his
waistcoat pocket.

     Jo unfolded it, and looked much abashed, for it was one of
her own contributions to a paper that paid for poetry, which
accounted for her sending it an occasional attempt.

     "How could that bring you?" she asked, wondering what he
meant.

     "I found it by chance.  I knew it by the names and the
initials, and in it there was one little verse that seemed to
call me.  Read and find him.  I will see that you go not in
the wet."

                         IN THE GARRET

                 Four little chests all in a row,
                 Dim with dust, and worn by time,
                 All fashioned and filled, long ago,
                 By children now in their prime.
                 Four little keys hung side by side,
                 With faded ribbons, brave and gay
                 When fastened there, with childish pride,
                 Long ago, on a rainy day.
                 Four little names, one on each lid,
                 Carved out by a boyish hand,
                 And underneath there lieth hid
                 Histories of the happpy band
                 Once playing here, and pausing oft
                 To hear the sweet refrain,
                 That came and went on the roof aloft,
                 In the falling summer rain.

                 "Meg" on the first lid, smooth and fair.
                 I look in with loving eyes,
                 For folded here, with well-known care,
                 A goodly gathering lies,
                 The record of a peaceful life--
                 Gifts to gentle child and girl,
                 A bridal gown, lines to a wife,
                 A tiny shoe, a baby curl.
                 No toys in this first chest remain,
                 For all are carried away,
                 In their old age, to join again
                 In another small Meg's play.
                 Ah, happy mother!  Well I know
                 You hear, like a sweet refrain,
                 Lullabies ever soft and low
                 In the falling summer rain.

                 "Jo" on the next lid, scratched and worn,
                 And within a motley store
                 Of headless, dolls, of schoolbooks torn,
                 Birds and beasts that speak no more,
                 Spoils brought home from the fairy ground
                 Only trod by youthful feet,
                 Dreams of a future never found,
                 Memories of a past still sweet,
                 Half-writ poems, stories wild,
                 April letters, warm and cold,
                 Diaries of a wilful child,
                 Hints of a woman early old,
                 A woman in a lonely home,
                 Hearing, like a sad refrain--
                 "Be worthy, love, and love will come,"
                 In the falling summer rain.

                 My Beth!  the dust is always swept
                 From the lid that bears your name,
                 As if by loving eyes that wept,
                 By careful hands that often came.
                 Death cannonized for us one saint,
                 Ever less human than divine,
                 And still we lay, with tender plaint,
                 Relics in this household shrine--
                 The silver bell, so seldom rung,
                 The little cap which last she wore,
                 The fair, dead Catherine that hung
                 By angels borne above her door.
                 The songs she sang, without lament,
                 In her prison-house of pain,
                 Forever are they sweetly blent
                 With the falling summer rain.

                 Upon the last lid's polished field--
                 Legend now both fair and true
                 A gallant knight bears on his shield,
                 "Amy" in letters gold and blue.
                 Within lie snoods that bound her hair,
                 Slippers that have danced their last,
                 Faded flowers laid by with care,
                 Fans whose airy toils are past,
                 Gay valentines, all ardent flames,
                 Trifles that have borne their part
                 In girlish hopes and fears and shames,
                 The record of a maiden heart
                 Now learning fairer, truer spells,
                 Hearing, like a blithe refrain,
                 The silver sound of bridal bells
                 In the falling summer rain.

                 Four little chests all in a row,
                 Dim with dust, and worn by time,
                 Four women, taught by weal and woe
                 To love and labor in their prime.
                 Four sisters, parted for an hour,
                 None lost, one only gone before,
                 Made by love's immortal power,
                 Nearest and dearest evermore.
                 Oh, when these hidden stores of ours
                 Lie open to the Father's sight,
                 May they be rich in golden hours,
                 Deeds that show fairer for the light,
                 Lives whose brave music long shall ring,
                 Like a spirit-stirring strain,
                 Souls that shall gladly soar and sing
                 In the long sunshine after rain.

     "It's very bad poetry, but I felt it when I wrote it, one day
when I was very lonely, and had a good cry on a rag bag.  I never
thought it would go where it could tell tales," said Jo, tearing
up the verses the Professor had treasured so long.

     "Let it go, it has done it's duty, and I will haf a fresh one
when I read all the brown book in which she keeps her little
secrets," said Mr. Bhaer with a smile as he watched the fragments
fly away on the wind.  "Yes," he added earnestly, "I read that,
and I think to myself, She has a sorrow, she is lonely, she would
find comfort in true love.  I haf a heart full, full for her. Shall
I not go and say, "If this is not too poor a thing to gif for what
I shall hope to receive, take it in Gott's name?"

     "And so you came to find that it was not too poor,but the one
precious thing I needed," whispered Jo.

     "I had no courage to think that at first, heavenly kind as was
your welcome to me.  But soon I began to hope, and then I said, `I
will haf her if I die for it'. and so I will!" cried Mr. Bhaer,
with a defiant nod, as if the walls of mist closing round them were
barriers which he was to surmount or valiantly knock down.

     Jo thought that was splendid, and resolved to be worthy of her
knight, though he did not come prancing on a charger in gorgeous
array.

     "What made you stay away so long?" she asked presently, finding
it so pleasant to ask confidential questions and get delightful
answers that she could not keep silent.

     "It was not easy, but I could not find the heart to take you
from that so happy home until I could haf a prospect of one to
gif you, after much time, perhaps, and hard work.  How could I ask
you to gif up so much for a poor old fellow, who has no fortune
but a little learning?"

     "I'm glad you are poor.  I couldn't bear a rich husband,"
said Jo decidedly, adding in a softer tone, "Don't fear poverty.
I've known it long enough to lose my dread and be happy working
for those I love, and don't call yourself old--forty is the prime
of life.  I couldn't help loving you if you were seventy!"

     The Professor found that so touching that he would have been
glad of his handkerchief, if he could have got at it.  As her
couldn't, Jo wiped his eyes for him, and said, laughing, as she
took away a bundle or two...

     "I may be strong-minded, but no one can say I'm out of my
sphere now, for woman's special mission is supposed to be drying
tears and bearing burdens.  I'm to carry my share, Friedrich,
and help to earn the home.  Make up your mind to that, or I'll
never go," she added resolutely, as he tried to reclaim his load.

     "We shall see.  Haf you patience to wait a long time, Jo?
I must go away and do my work alone.  I must help my boys first,
because, even for you, I may not break my word to Minna.  Can
you forgif that, and be happy while we hope and wait?"

     "Yes, I know I can, for we love one another, and that makes
all the rest easy to bear.  I have my duty, also, and my work.
I couldn't enjoy myself if I neglected them even for you, so
there's no need of hurry or impatience.  You can do your part
out West, I can do mine here, and both be happy hoping for the
best, and leaving the future to be as God wills."

     "Ah! Thou gifest me such hope and courage, and I haf nothing
to gif back but a full heart and these empty hands," cried the
Professor, quite overcome.

     Jo never, never would learn to be proper, for when he said
that as they stood upon the steps, she just put both hands into
his, whispering tenderly,  "Not empty now," and stooping down,
kissed her Friedrich under the umbrella.  It was dreadful, but
she would have done it if the flock of draggle-tailed sparrows
on the hedge had been human beings, for she was very far gone
indeed, and quite regardless of everything but her own happiness.
Though it came in such a very simple guise, that was the crowning
moment of both their lives, when, turning from the night and
storm and loneliness to the household light and warmth and peace
waiting to receive them, with a glad "Welcome home!"  Jo led her
lover in, and shut the door.

                    CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN

     For a year Jo and her Professor worked and waited, hoped
and loved, met occasionally, and wrote such voluminous letters
that the rise in the price of paper was accounted for, Laurie
said.  The second year began rather soberly, for their pros-
pects did not brighten, and Aunt March died suddenly.  But
when their first sorrow was over--for they loved the old lady
in spite of her sharp tongue--they found they had cause for
rejoicing, for she had left Plumfield to Jo, which made all
sorts of joyful things possible.

     "It's a fine old place, and will bring a handsome sum, for
of course you intend to sell it," said Laurie, as they were all
talking the matter over some weeks later.

     "No, I don't," was Jo's decided answer, as she petted the
fat poodle, whom she had adopted, out of respect to his former
mistress.

     "You don't mean to live there?"

     "Yes, I do."

     "But, my dear girl, it's an immense house, and will take a
power of money to keep it in order.  The garden and orchard alone
need two or three men, and farming isn't in Bhaer's line, I take
it."

     "He'll try his hand at it there, if I propose it."

     "And you expect to live on the produce of the place?  Well,
that sounds paradisiacal, but you'll find it desperate hard work."

     "The crop we are going to raise is a profitable one," And
Jo laughed.

     "Of what is this fine crop to consist, ma'am?"

     "Boys.  I want to open a school for little lads--a good,
happy, homelike school, with me to take care of them and Fritz
to teach them."

     "That's a truly Joian plan for you!  Isn't that just like
her?" cried Laurie, appealing to the family, who looked as much
surprised as he.

     "I like it," said Mrs. March decidedly.

     "So do I," added her husband, who welcomed the thought of
a chance for trying the Socratic method of education on modern
youth.

     "It will be an immense care for Jo," said Meg, stroking
the head or her one all-absorbing son.

     "Jo can do it, and be happy in it.  It's a splendid idea.
Tell us all about it," cried Mr. Laurence, who had been longing
to lend the lovers a hand, but knew that they would refuse his
help.

     "I knew you'd stand by me, sir.  Amy does too--I see it in
her eyes, though she prudently waits to turn it over in her mind
before she speaks.  Now, my dear people," continued Jo earnestly,
"just understand that this isn't a new idea of mine, but a long-
cherished plan.  Before my Fritz came, I used to think how, when
I'd made my fortune, and no one needed me at home, I'd hire a
big house, and pick up some poor, forlorn little lads who hadn't
any mothers, and take care of them, and make life jolly for them
before it was too late.  I see so many going to ruin for want of
help at the right minute, I love so to do anything for them, I
seem to feel their wants, and sympathize with their troubles, and
oh, I should so like to be a mother to them!"

     Mrs. March held out her hand to Jo, who took it, smiling,
with tears in her eyes, and went on in the old enthusiastic way,
which they had not seen for a long while.

     "I told my plan to Fritz once, and he said it was just what
he would like, and agreed to try it when we got rich.  Bless his
dear heart, he's been doing it all his life--helping poor boys, I
mean, not getting rich, that he'll never be.  Money doesn't stay
in his pocket long enough to lay up any.  But now, thanks to my
good old aunt, who loved me better than I ever deserved, I'm rich,
at least I feel so, and we can live at Plumfield perfectly well,
if we have a flourishing school.  It's just the place for boys,
the house is big, and the furniture strong and plain.  There's
plenty of room for dozens inside, and splendid grounds outside.
They could help in the garden and orchard.  Such work is healthy,
isn't it, sir?  Then Fritz could train and teach in his own way,
and Father will help him.  I can feed and nurse and pet and scold
them, and Mother will be my stand-by.  I've always longed for lots
of boys, and never had enough, now I can fill the house full and
revel in the little dears to my heart's content.  Think what lux-
ury--Plumfield my own, and a wilderness of boys to enjoy it with
me."

     As Jo waved her hands and gave a sigh of rapture, the family
went off into a gale of merriment, and Mr. Laurence laughed till
they thought he'd have an apoplectic fit.

     "I don't see anything funny," she said gravely, when she
could be heard.  "Nothing could be more natural and proper than
for my Professor to open a school, and for me to prefer to reside
in my own estate."

     "She is putting on airs already," said Laurie, who regarded
the idea in the light of a capital joke.  "But may I inquire how
you intend to support the establishment? If all the pupils are
little ragamuffins, I'm afraid your crop won't be profitable in
a worldly sense, Mr. Bhaer."

     "Now don't be a wet-blanket, Teddy. Of course I shall have
rich pupils, also--perhaps begin with such altogether.  Then,
when I've got a start, I can take in a ragamuffin or two, just
for a relish.  Rich people's children often need care and comfort,
as well as poor.  I've seen unfortunate little creatures left to
servants, or backward ones pushed forward, when it's real cruelty.
Some are naughty through mismanagment or neglect, and some lose
their mothers.  Besides, the best have to get through the hobble-
dehoy age, and that's the very time they need most patience and
kindness.  People laugh at them, and hustle them about, try to
keep them out of sight, and expect them to turn all at once from
pretty children into fine young men.  They don't complain much--
plucky little souls--but they feel it.  I've been through some-
thing of it, and I know all about it.  I've a special interest
in such young bears, and like to show them that I see the warm,
honest, well-meaning boys' hearts, in spite of the clumsy arms
and legs and the topsy-turvy heads.  I've had experience, too,
for haven't I brought up one boy to be a pride and honor to his
family?"

     "I'll testify that you tried to do it," said Laurie with a
grateful look.

     "And I've succeeded beyond my hopes, for here you are, a
steady, sensible businessman, doing heaps of good with your
money, and laying up the blessings of the poor, instead of dollars.
But you are not merely a businessman, you love good and beautiful
things, enjoy them yourself, and let others go halves, as you
always did in the old times.  I am proud of you, Teddy, for you
get better every year, and everyone feels it, though you won't
let them say so.  Yes, and when I have my flock, I'll just point
to you, and say `There's your model, my lads'."

     Poor Laurie didn't know where to look, for, man though he
was, something of the old bashfulness came over him as this burst
of praise made all faces turn approvingly upon him.

     "I say, Jo, that's rather too much," he began, just in his
old boyish way.  "You have all done more for me than I can ever
thank you for, except by doing my best not to disapoint you. You
have rather cast me off lately, Jo, but I've had the best of help,
nevertheless.  So, if I've got on at all, you may thank these two
for it."  And he laid one hand gently on his grandfather's head,
and the other on Amy's golden one, for the three were never far
apart.

     "I do think that families are the most beautiful things in
all the world!" burst out Jo, who was in an unusually up-lifted
frame of mind just then.  "When I have one of my own, I hope it
will be as happy as the three I know and love the best.  If John
and my Fritz were only here, it would be quite a little heaven
on earth," she added more quietly.  And that night when she went
to her room after a blissful evening of family counsels, hopes,
and plans, her heart was so full of happiness that she could only
calm it by kneeling beside the empty bed always near her own, and
thinking tender thoughts of Beth.

     It was a very astonishing year altogether, for things seemed
to happen in an unusually rapid and delightful manner.  Almost
before she knew where she was, Jo found herself married and set-
tled at Plumfield.  Then a family of six or seven boys sprung up
like mushrooms, and flourished surprisingly, poor boys as well as
rich, for Mr. Laurence was continually finding some touching case
of destitution, and begging the Bhaers to take pity on the child,
and he would gladly pay a trifle for its support.  In this way,
the sly old gentleman got round proud Jo, and furnished her with
the style of boy in which she most delighted.

     Of course it was uphill work at first, and Jo made queer
mistakes, but the wise Professor steered her safely into calmer
waters, and the most rampant ragamuffin was conquered in the end.
How Jo did enjoy her `wilderness of boys', and how poor, dear
Aunt March would have lamented had she been there to see the
sacred precincts of prim, well-ordered Plumfield overrun with
Toms, Dicks, and Harrys!  There was a sort of poetic justice
about it, after all, for the old lady had been the terror of
the boys for miles around, and now the exiles feasted freely
on forbidden plums, kicked up the gravel with profane boots un-
reproved, and played cricket in the big field where the irritable
`cow with a crumpled horn' used to invite rash youths to come and
be tossed.  It became a sort of boys' paradise, and Laurie sug-
gested that it should be called the `Bhaer-garten', as a compli-
ment to its master and appropriate to its inhabitants.

     It never was a fashionable school, and the Professor did not
lay up a fortune, but it was just what Jo intended it to be--`a
happy, homelike place for boys, who needed teaching, care, and
kindness'.  Every room in the big house was soon full.  Every
little plot in the garden soon had its owner.  A regular mena-
gerie appeared in barn and shed, for pet animals were allowed.
And three times a day, Jo smiled at her Fritz from the head of
a long table lined on either side with rows of happy young faces,
which all turned to her with affectionate eyes, confiding words,
and grateful hearts, full of love for `Mother Bhaer'.  She had
boys enough now, and did not tire of them, though they were not
angels, by any means, and some of them caused both Professor and
Professorin much trouble and anxiety.  But her faith in the good
spot which exists in the heart of the naughtiest, sauciest, most
tantalizing little ragamuffin gave her patience, skill, and in
time success, for no mortal boy could hold out long with Father
Bhaer shining on him as benevolently as the sun, and Mother Bhaer
forgiving him seventy times seven.  Very precious to Jo was the
friendship of the lads, their penitent sniffs and whispers after
wrongdoing, their droll or touching little confidences, their
pleasant enthusiasms, hopes, and plans, even their misfortunes,
for they only endeared them to her all the more.  There were slow
boys and bashful boys, feeble boys and riotous boys, boys that
lisped and boys that stuttered, one or two lame ones, and a
merry little quadroon, who could not be taken in elsewhere, but
who was welcome to the `Bhaer-garten', though some people pre-
dicted that his admission would ruin the school.

     Yes, Jo was a very happy woman there, in spite of hard work,
much anxiety, and a perpetual racket. She enjoyed it heartily and
found the applause of her boys more satisfying than any praise of
the world, for now she told no stories except to her flock of
enthusiastic believers and admirers.  As the years went on, two
little lads of her own came to increase her happiness--Rob,
named for Grandpa, and Teddy, a happy-go-lucky baby, who seemed
to have inherited his papa's sunshiny temper as well as his
mother's lively spirit.  How they ever grew up alive in that
whirlpool of boys was a mystery to their grandma and aunts, but
they flourished like dandelions in spring, and their rough
nurses loved and served them well.

     There were a great many holidays at Plumfield, and one of
the most delightful was the yearly apple-picking. For then the
Marches, Laurences, Brookes. And Bhaers turned out in full force
and made a day of it. Five years after Jo's wedding, one of these
fruitful festivals occurred, a mellow October day, when the air
was full of an exhilarating freshness which made the spirits rise
and the blood dance healthily in the veins.  The old orchard wore
its holiday attire.  Goldenrod and asters fringed the mossy walls.
Grasshoppers skipped briskly in the sere grass, and crickets chir-
ped like fairy pipers at a feast.  Squirrels were busy with their
small harvesting.  Birds twittered their adieux from the alders
in the lane, and every tree stood ready to send down its shower
of red or yellow apples at the first shake.  Everybody was there.
Everybody laughed and sang, climbed up and tumbled down. Every-
body declared that there never had been such a perfect day or
such a jolly set to enjoy it, and everyone gave themselves up to
the simple pleasures of the hour as freely as if there were no
such things as care or sorrow in the world.

     Mr. March strolled placidly about, quoting Tusser, Cowley,
and Columella to Mr. Laurence, while enjoying . . .

                The gentle apple's winey juice.

The Professor charged up and down the green aisles like a stout
Teutonic knight, with a pole for a lance, leading on the boys,
who made a hook and ladder company of themselves, and performed
wonders in the way of ground and lofty tumbling.  Laurie devoted
himself to the little ones, rode his small daughter in a bushel-
basket, took Daisy up among the bird's nests, and kept adventur-
ous Rob from breaking his neck.  Mrs. March and Meg sat among
the apple piles like a pair of Pomonas, sorting the contributions
that kept pouring in, while Amy with a beautiful motherly express-
ion in her face sketched the various groups, and watched over one
pale lad, who sat adoring her with his little crutch beside him.

     Jo was in her element that day, and rushed about, with her
gown pinned up, and her hat anywhere but on her head, and her
baby tucked under her arm, ready for any lively adventure which
might turn up.  Little Teddy bore a charmed life, for nothing
ever happened to him, and Jo never felt any anxiety when he was
whisked up into a tree by one lad, galloped off on the back of
another, or supplied with sour russets by his indulgent papa,
who labored under the Germanic delusion that babies could digest
anything, from pickled cabbage to buttons, nails, and their own
small shoes.  She knew that little Ted would turn up again in
time, safe and rosy, dirty and serene, and she always received
him back with a hearty welcome, for Jo loved her babies tenderly.

     At four o'clock a lull took place, and baskets remained
empty, while the apple pickers rested and compared rents and
bruises.  Then Jo and Meg, with a detachment of the bigger boys,
set forth the supper on the grass, for an out-of-door tea was
always the crowning joy of the day.  The land literally flowed
with milk and honey on such occasions, for the lads were not
required to sit at table, but allowed to partake of refreshment
as they liked--freedom being the sauce best beloved by the boy-
ish soul.  They availed themselves of the rare privilege to the
fullest extent, for some tried the pleasing experiment of drink-
ing mild while standing on their heads, others lent a charm to
leapfrog by eating pie in the pauses of the game, cookies were
sown broadcast over the field, and apple turnovers roosted in
the trees like a new style of bird.  The little girls had a
private tea party, and Ted roved among the edibles at his own
sweet will.

     When no one could eat any more, the Professor proposed the
first regular toast, which was always drunk at such times--"Aunt
March, God bless her!"  A toast heartily given by the good man,
who never forgot how much he owed her, and quietly drunk by the
boys, who had been taught to keep her memory green.

     "Now, Grandma's sixtieth birthday!  Long life to her, with
three times three!"

     That was given with a will, as you may well believe, and
the cheering once begun, it was hard to stop it.  Everybody's
health was proposed, form Mr. Laurence, who was considered their
special patron, to the astonished guinea pig, who had strayed
from its proper sphere in search of its young master.  Demi, as
the oldest grandchild, then presented the queen of the day with
various gifts, so numerous that they were transported to the
festive scene in a wheelbarrow. Funny presents, some of them,
but what would have been defects to other eyes were ornaments
to Grandma's--for the children's gifts were all their own. Every
stitch Daisy's patient little fingers had put into the handker-
chiefs she hemmed was better than embroidery to Mrs. March. Demi's
miracle of mechanical skill, though the cover wouldn't shut, Rob's
footstool had a wiggle in its uneven legs that she declared was
soothing, and no page of the costly book Amy's child gave her was
so fair as that on which appeared in tipsy capitals, the words--
"To dear Grandma, from her little Beth."

     During the ceremony the boys had mysteriously disappeared,
and when Mrs. March had tried to thank her children, and broken
down, while Teddy wiped her eyes on his pinafore, the Professor
suddenly began to sing.  Then, from above him, voice after voice
took up the words, and from tree to tree echoed the music of the
unseen choir, as the boys sang with all their hearts the little
song that Jo had written, Laurie set to music, and the Professor
trained his lads to give with the best effect.  This was some-
thing altogether new, and it proved a grand success, for Mrs.
March couldn't get over her surprise, and insisted on shaking
hands with every one of the featherless birds, from tall Franz
and Emil to the little quadroon, who had the sweetest voice of
all.

     After this, the boys dispersed for a final lark, leaving Mrs.
March and her daughters under the festival tree.

     "I don't think I ever ought to call myself `unlucky Jo' again,
when my greatest wish has been so beautifully gratified," said Mrs.
Bhaer, taking Teddy's little fist out of the milk pitcher, in which
he was rapturously churning.

     "And yet your life is very different from the one you pictured
so long ago.  Do you remember our castles in the air?" asked Amy,
smiling as she watched Laurie and John playing cricket with the
boys.

     "Dear fellows!  It does my heart good to see them forget bus-
iness and frolic for a day," answered Jo, who now spoke in a maternal
way of all mankind.  "Yes, I remember, but the life I wanted then
seems selfish, lonely, and cold to me now.  I haven't given up the
hope that I may write a good book yet, but I can wait, and I'm
sure it will be all the better for such experiences and illustra-
tions as these."  And Jo pointed from the lively lads in the
distance to her father, leaning on the Professor's arm, as they
walked to and fro in the sunshine, deep in one of the conversations
which both enjoyed so much, and then to her mother, sitting en-
throned among her daughters, with their children in her lap and at
her feet, as if all found help and happiness in the face which
never could grow old to them.

     "My castle was the most nearly realized of all.  I asked for
splendid things, to be sure, but in my heart I knew I should be
satisfied, if I had a little home, and John, and some dear chil-
dren like these.  I've got them all, thank God, and am the
happiest woman in the world."  And Meg laid her hand on her tall
boy's head, with a face full of tender and devout content.

     "My castle is very different from what I planned, but I would
not alter it, though, like Jo, I don't relinquish all my artistic
hopes, or confine myself to helping others fulfill their dreams of
beauty.  I've begun to model a figure of baby, and Laurie says it
is the best thing I've ever done.  I think so, myself, and mean
to do it in marble, so that, whatever happens, I may at least keep
the image of my little angel."

     As Amy spoke, a great tear dropped on the golden hair of the
sleeping child in her arms, for her one well-beloved daughter was
a frail little creature and the dread of losing her was the shad-
ow over Amy's sunshine.  This cross was doing much for both father
and mother, for one love and sorrow bound them closely together.
Amy's nature was growing sweeter, deeper, and more tender.  Laurie
was growing more serious, strong, and firm, and both were learning
that beauty, youth, good fortune, even love itself, cannot keep
care and pain, loss and sorrow, from the most blessed for ...

              Into each life some rain must fall,
              Some days must be dark and sad and dreary.

     "She is growing better, I am sure of it, my dear.  Don't
despond, but hope and keep happy,"  said Mrs. March, as tender-
hearted Daisy stooped from her knee to lay her rosy cheek against
her little cousin's pale one.

     "I never ought to, while I have you to cheer me up, Marmee,
and Laurie to take more than half of every burden," replied Amy
warmly.  "He never lets me see his anxiety, but is so sweet and
patient with me, so devoted to Beth, and such a stay and comfort
to me always that I can't love him enough.  So, in spite of my
one cross, I can say with Meg, `Thank God, I'm a happy woman.'"

     "There's no need for me to say it, for everyone can see
that I'm far happier than I deserve," added Jo, glancing from
her good husband to her chubby children, tumbling on the grass
beside her.  "Fritz is getting gray and stout.  I'm growing as
thin as a shadow, and am thirty.  We never shall be rich, and
Plumfield may burn up any night, for that incorrigible Tommy
Bangs will smoke sweet-fern cigars under the bed-clothes,
though he's set himself afire three times already.  But in
spite of these unromantic facts, I have nothing to complain
of, and never was so jolly in my life.  Excuse the remark, but
living among boys, I can't help using their expressions now
and then."

     "Yes, Jo, I think your harvest will be a good one," began
Mrs. March, frightening away a big black cricket that was
staring Teddy out of countenance.

     "Not half so good as yours, Mother.  Here it is, and we
never can thank you enough for the patient sowing and reaping
you have done," cried Jo, with the loving impetuosity which
she never would outgrow.

     "I hope there will be more wheat and fewer tares every
year," said Amy softly.

     "A large sheaf, but I know there's room in your heart for
it, Marmee dear," added Meg's tender voice.

     Touched to the heart, Mrs. March could only stretch out
her arms, as if to gather children and grandchildren to herself,
and say, with face and voice full of motherly love, gratitude,
and humility...

     "Oh, my girls, however long you may live, I never can
wish you a greater happiness than this!"

                    END OF LITTLE WOMEN

                    Aesop's Fables Translated by George Fyler Townsend




                    The Wolf and the Lamb

                    WOLF, meeting with a Lamb astray from the fold, resolved not to
                    lay violent hands on him, but to find some plea to justify to the
                    Lamb the Wolf's right to eat him.  He thus addressed him:
                    "Sirrah, last year you grossly insulted me."  "Indeed," bleated
                    the Lamb in a mournful tone of voice, "I was not then born."  Then
                    said the Wolf, "You feed in my pasture."  "No, good sir," replied
                    the Lamb, "I have not yet tasted grass."  Again said the Wolf,
                    "You drink of my well."  "No," exclaimed the Lamb, "I never yet
                    drank water, for as yet my mother's milk is both food and drink
                    to me."  Upon which the Wolf seized him and ate him up, saying,
                    "Well! I won't remain supperless, even though you refute every
                    one of my imputations."  The tyrant will always find a pretext for
                    his tyranny.


                    The Bat and the Weasels

                    A BAT who fell upon the ground and was caught by a Weasel pleaded
                    to be spared his life.  The Weasel refused, saying that he was by
                    nature the enemy of all birds.  The Bat assured him that he was
                    not a bird, but a mouse, and thus was set free.  Shortly
                    afterwards the Bat again fell to the ground and was caught by
                    another Weasel, whom he likewise entreated not to eat him.  The
                    Weasel said that he had a special hostility to mice.  The Bat
                    assured him that he was not a mouse, but a bat, and thus a second
                    time escaped.

                    It is wise to turn circumstances to good account.


                    The and the Grasshopper

                    AN having heard some Grasshoppers chirping, was highly
                    enchanted; and, desiring to possess the same charms of melody,
                    demanded what sort of food they lived on to give them such
                    beautiful voices.  They replied, "The dew."  The resolved that
                    he would live only upon dew, and in a short time died of hunger.


                    The Lion and the Mouse

                    A LION was awakened from sleep by a Mouse running over his face.
                    Rising up angrily, he caught him and was about to kill him, when
                    the Mouse piteously entreated, saying:  "If you would only spare
                    my life, I would be sure to repay your kindness."  The Lion
                    laughed and let him go.  It happened shortly after this that the
                    Lion was caught by some hunters, who bound him by st ropes to the
                    ground.  The Mouse, recognizing his roar, came gnawed the rope
                    with his teeth, and set him free, exclaim

                    "You ridiculed the idea of my ever being able to help you,
                    expecting to receive from me any repayment of your favor; I now
                    you know that it is possible for even a Mouse to con benefits on
                    a Lion."


                    The Charcoal-Burner and the Fuller

                    A CHARCOAL-BURNER carried on his trade in his own house.  One day
                    he met a friend, a Fuller, and entreated him to come and live
                    with him, saying that they should be far better neighbors and
                    that their housekeeping expenses would be lessened.  The Fuller
                    replied, "The arrangement is impossible as far as I am concerned,
                    for whatever I should whiten, you would immediately blacken again
                    with your charcoal."

                    Like will draw like.


                    The Father and His Sons

                    A FATHER had a family of sons who were perpetually quarreling
                    among themselves.  When he failed to heal their disputes by his
                    exhortations, he determined to give them a practical illustration
                    of the evils of disunion; and for this purpose he one day told
                    them to bring him a bundle of sticks.  When they had done so, he
                    placed the faggot into the hands of each of them in succession,
                    and ordered them to break it in pieces.  They tried with all
                    their strength, and were not able to do it.  He next opened the
                    faggot, took the sticks separately, one by one, and again put
                    them into his sons' hands, upon which they broke them easily.  He
                    then addressed them in these words:  "My sons, if you are of one
                    mind, and unite to assist each other, you will be as this faggot,
                    uninjured by all the attempts of your enemies; but if you are
                    divided among yourselves, you will be broken as easily as these
                    sticks."


                    The Boy Hunting Locusts

                    A BOY was hunting for locusts.  He had caught a goodly number,
                    when he saw a Scorpion, and mistaking him for a locust, reached
                    out his hand to take him.  The Scorpion, showing his sting, said:
                    If you had but touched me, my friend, you would have lost me, and
                    all your locusts too!"


                    The Cock and the Jewel

                    A COCK, scratching for food for himself and his hens, found a
                    precious stone and exclaimed:  "If your owner had found thee, and
                    not I, he would have taken thee up, and have set thee in thy
                    first estate; but I have found thee for no purpose.  I would
                    rather have one barleycorn than all the jewels in the world."


                    The Kingdom of the Lion

                    THE BEASTS of the field and forest had a Lion as their king.  He
                    was neither wrathful, cruel, nor tyrannical, but just and gentle
                    as a king could be.  During his reign he made a royal
                    proclamation for a general assembly of all the birds and beasts,
                    and drew up conditions for a universal league, in which the Wolf
                    and the Lamb, the Panther and the Kid, the Tiger and the Stag,
                    the Dog and the Hare, should live together in perfect peace and
                    amity.  The Hare said, "Oh, how I have longed to see this day, in
                    which the weak shall take their place with impunity by the side
                    of the strong."  And after the Hare said this, he ran for his
                    life.


                    The Wolf and the Crane

                    A WOLF who had a bone stuck in his throat hired a Crane, for a
                    large sum, to put her head into his mouth and draw out the bone.
                    When the Crane had extracted the bone and demanded the promised
                    payment, the Wolf, grinning and grinding his teeth, exclaimed:
                    "Why, you have surely already had a sufficient recompense, in
                    having been permitted to draw out your head in safety from the
                    mouth and jaws of a wolf."

                    In serving the wicked, expect no reward, and be thankful if you
                    escape injury for your pains.


                    The Fisherman Piping

                    A FISHERMAN skilled in music took his flute and his nets to the
                    seashore.  Standing on a projecting rock, he played several tunes
                    in the hope that the fish, attracted by his melody, would of
                    their own accord dance into his net, which he had placed below.
                    At last, having long waited in vain, he laid aside his flute, and
                    casting his net into the sea, made an excellent haul of fish.
                    When he saw them leaping about in the net upon the rock he said:
                    "O you most perverse creatures, when I piped you would not dance,
                    but now that I have ceased you do so merrily."


                    Hercules and the Wagoner

                    A CARTER was driving a wagon along a country lane, when the
                    wheels sank down deep into a rut.  The rustic driver, stupefied
                    and aghast, stood looking at the wagon, and did nothing but utter
                    loud cries to Hercules to come and help him.  Hercules, it is
                    said, appeared and thus addressed him:  "Put your shoulders to the
                    wheels, my man.  Goad on your bullocks, and never more pray to me
                    for help, until you have done your best to help yourself, or
                    depend upon it you will henceforth pray in vain."

                    Self-help is the best help.


                    The Ants and the Grasshopper

                    THE ANTS were spending a fine winter's day drying grain collected
                    in the summertime.  A Grasshopper, perishing with famine, passed
                    by and earnestly begged for a little food.  The Ants inquired of
                    him, "Why did you not treasure up food during the summer?'  He
                    replied, "I had not leisure enough.  I passed the days in
                    singing."  They then said in derision:  "If you were foolish enough
                    to sing all the summer, you must dance supperless to bed in the
                    winter."


                    The Traveler and His Dog

                    A TRAVELER about to set out on a journey saw his Dog stand at the
                    door stretching himself.  He asked him sharply:  "Why do you stand
                    there gaping? Everything is ready but you, so come with me
                    instantly."  The Dog, wagging his tail, replied:  "O, master! I am
                    quite ready; it is you for whom I am waiting."

                    The loiterer often blames delay on his more active friend.


                    The Dog and the Shadow

                    A DOG, crossing a bridge over a stream with a piece of flesh in
                    his mouth, saw his own shadow in the water and took it for that
                    of another Dog, with a piece of meat double his own in size.  He
                    immediately let go of his own, and fiercely attacked the other
                    Dog to get his larger piece from him.  He thus lost both:  that
                    which he grasped at in the water, because it was a shadow; and
                    his own, because the stream swept it away.


                    The Mole and His Mother

                    A MOLE, a creature blind from birth, once said to his Mother:  "I
                    am sure than I can see, Mother!"  In the desire to prove to him
                    his mistake, his Mother placed before him a few grains of
                    frankincense, and asked, "What is it?'  The young Mole said, "It
                    is a pebble."  His Mother exclaimed:  "My son, I am afraid that you
                    are not only blind, but that you have lost your sense of smell.


                    The Herdsman and the Lost Bull

                    A HERDSMAN tending his flock in a forest lost a Bull-calf from
                    the fold.  After a long and fruitless search, he made a vow that,
                    if he could only discover the thief who had stolen the Calf, he
                    would offer a lamb in sacrifice to Hermes, Pan, and the Guardian
                    Deities of the forest.  Not long afterwards, as he ascended a
                    small hillock, he saw at its foot a Lion feeding on the Calf.
                    Terrified at the sight, he lifted his eyes and his hands to
                    heaven, and said:  "Just now I vowed to offer a lamb to the
                    Guardian Deities of the forest if I could only find out who had
                    robbed me; but now that I have discovered the thief, I would
                    willingly add a full-grown Bull to the Calf I have lost, if I may
                    only secure my own escape from him in safety."


                    The Hare and the Tortoise

                    A HARE one day ridiculed the short feet and slow pace of the
                    Tortoise, who replied, laughing:  "Though you be swift as the
                    wind, I will beat you in a race."  The Hare, believing her
                    assertion to be simply impossible, assented to the proposal; and
                    they agreed that the Fox should choose the course and fix the
                    goal.  On the day appointed for the race the two started
                    together.  The Tortoise never for a moment stopped, but went on
                    with a slow but steady pace straight to the end of the course.
                    The Hare, lying down by the wayside, fell fast asleep.  At last
                    waking up, and moving as fast as he could, he saw the Tortoise
                    had reached the goal, and was comfortably dozing after her
                    fatigue.

                    Slow but steady wins the race.


                    The Pomegranate, Apple-Tree, and Bramble

                    THE POMEGRANATE and Apple-Tree disputed as to which was the most
                    beautiful.  When their strife was at its height, a Bramble from
                    the neighboring hedge lifted up its voice, and said in a boastful
                    tone:  "Pray, my dear friends, in my presence at least cease from
                    such vain disputings."


                    The Farmer and the Stork

                    A FARMER placed nets on his newly-sown plowlands and caught a
                    number of Cranes, which came to pick up his seed.  With them he
                    trapped a Stork that had fractured his leg in the net and was
                    earnestly beseeching the Farmer to spare his life.  "Pray save
                    me, Master," he said, "and let me go free this once.  My broken
                    limb should excite your pity.  Besides, I am no Crane, I am a
                    Stork, a bird of excellent character; and see how I love and
                    slave for my father and mother.  Look too, at my feathers--
                    they are not the least like those of a Crane."   The Farmer
                    laughed aloud and said, "It may be all as you say, I only know
                    this:  I have taken you with these robbers, the Cranes, and you
                    must die in their company."

                    Birds of a feather flock together.


                    The Farmer and the Snake

                    ONE WINTER a Farmer found a Snake stiff and frozen with cold.  He
                    had compassion on it, and taking it up, placed it in his bosom.
                    The Snake was quickly revived by the warmth, and resuming its
                    natural instincts, bit its benefactor, inflicting on him a mortal
                    wound.  "Oh," cried the Farmer with his last breath, "I am
                    rightly served for pitying a scoundrel."

                    The greatest kindness will not bind the ungrateful.


                    The Fawn and His Mother

                    A YOUNG FAWN once said to his Mother, "You are larger than a dog,
                    and swifter, and more used to running, and you have your horns as
                    a defense; why, then, O Mother! do the hounds frighten you so?"
                    She smiled, and said:  "I know full well, my son, that all you say
                    is true.  I have the advantages you mention, but when I hear even
                    the bark of a single dog I feel ready to faint, and fly away as
                    fast as I can."

                    No arguments will give courage to the coward.


                    The Bear and the Fox

                    A BEAR boasted very much of his philanthropy, saying that of all
                    animals he was the most tender in his regard for man, for he had
                    such respect for him that he would not even touch his dead body.
                    A Fox hearing these words said with a smile to the Bear, "Oh!
                    that you would eat the dead and not the living."


                    The Swallow and the Crow

                    THE SWALLOW and the Crow had a contention about their plumage.
                    The Crow put an end to the dispute by saying, "Your feathers are
                    all very well in the spring, but mine protect me against the
                    winter."

                    Fair weather friends are not worth much.


                    The Mountain in Labor

                    A MOUNTAIN was once greatly agitated.  Loud groans and noises
                    were heard, and crowds of people came from all parts to see what
                    was the matter.  While they were assembled in anxious expectation
                    of some terrible calamity, out came a Mouse.

                    Don't make much ado about nothing.


                    The, the Fox, and the Lion

                    THE and the Fox, having entered into partnership together for
                    their mutual protection, went out into the forest to hunt.  They
                    had not proceeded far when they met a Lion.  The Fox, seeing
                    imminent danger, approached the Lion and promised to contrive for
                    him the capture of the if the Lion would pledge his word not
                    to harm the Fox.  Then, upon assuring the that he would not
                    be injured, the Fox led him to a deep pit and arranged that he
                    should fall into it.  The Lion, seeing that the was secured,
                    immediately clutched the Fox, and attacked the at his
                    leisure.


                    The Tortoise and the Eagle

                    A TORTOISE, lazily basking in the sun, complained to the
                    sea-birds of her hard fate, that no one would teach her to fly.
                    An Eagle, hovering near, heard her lamentation and demanded what
                    reward she would give him if he would take her aloft and float
                    her in the air.  "I will give you," she said, "all the riches of
                    the Red Sea."  "I will teach you to fly then," said the Eagle; and
                    taking her up in his talons he carried her almost to the clouds
                    suddenly he let her go, and she fell on a lofty mountain, dashing
                    her shell to pieces.  The Tortoise exclaimed in the moment of
                    death:  "I have deserved my present fate; for what had I to do
                    with wings and clouds, who can with difficulty move about on the
                    earth?'

                    If men had all they wished, they would be often ruined.


                    The Flies and the Honey-Pot

                    A NUMBER of Flies were attracted to a jar of honey which had been
                    overturned in a housekeeper's room, and placing their feet in it,
                    ate greedily.  Their feet, however, became so smeared with the
                    honey that they could not use their wings, nor release
                    themselves, and were suffocated.  Just as they were expiring,
                    they exclaimed, "O foolish creatures that we are, for the sake of
                    a little pleasure we have destroyed ourselves."

                    Pleasure bought with pains, hurts.


                    The Man and the Lion

                    A MAN and a Lion traveled together through the forest.  They soon
                    began to boast of their respective superiority to each other in
                    strength and prowess.  As they were disputing, they passed a
                    statue carved in stone, which represented "a Lion strangled by a
                    Man."  The traveler pointed to it and said:  "See there! How strong
                    we are, and how we prevail over even the king of beasts."  The
                    Lion replied:  "This statue was made by one of you men.  If we
                    Lions knew how to erect statues, you would see the Man placed
                    under the paw of the Lion."

                    One story is good, till another is told.


                    The Farmer and the Cranes

                    SOME CRANES made their feeding grounds on some plowlands newly
                    sown with wheat.  For a long time the Farmer, brandishing an
                    empty sling, chased them away by the terror he inspired; but when
                    the birds found that the sling was only swung in the air, they
                    ceased to take any notice of it and would not move.  The Farmer,
                    on seeing this, charged his sling with stones, and killed a great
                    number.  The remaining birds at once forsook his fields, crying
                    to each other, "It is time for us to be off to Liliput:  for this
                    man is no longer content to scare us, but begins to show us in
                    earnest what he can do."

                    If words suffice not, blows must follow.


                    The Dog in the Manger

                    A DOG lay in a manger, and by his growling and snapping prevented
                    the oxen from eating the hay which had been placed for them.
                    "What a selfish Dog!"  said one of them to his companions; "he
                    cannot eat the hay himself, and yet refuses to allow those to eat
                    who can."


                    The Fox and the Goat

                    A FOX one day fell into a deep well and could find no means of
                    escape.  A Goat, overcome with thirst, came to the same well, and
                    seeing the Fox, inquired if the water was good.  Concealing his
                    sad plight under a merry guise, the Fox indulged in a lavish
                    praise of the water, saying it was excellent beyond measure, and
                    encouraging him to descend.  The Goat, mindful only of his
                    thirst, thoughtlessly jumped down, but just as he drank, the Fox
                    informed him of the difficulty they were both in and suggested a
                    scheme for their common escape.  "If," said he, "you will place
                    your forefeet upon the wall and bend your head, I will run up
                    your back and escape, and will help you out afterwards."  The Goat
                    readily assented and the Fox leaped upon his back.  Steadying
                    himself with the Goat's horns, he safely reached the mouth of the
                    well and made off as fast as he could.  When the Goat upbraided
                    him for breaking his promise, he turned around and cried out,
                    "You foolish old fellow! If you had as many brains in your head
                    as you have hairs in your beard, you would never have gone down
                    before you had inspected the way up, nor have exposed yourself to
                    dangers from which you had no means of escape."

                    Look before you leap.


                    The Bear and the Two Travelers

                    TWO MEN were traveling together, when a Bear suddenly met them on
                    their path.  One of them climbed up quickly into a tree and
                    concealed himself in the branches.  The other, seeing that he
                    must be attacked, fell flat on the ground, and when the Bear came
                    up and felt him with his snout, and smelt him all over, he held
                    his breath, and feigned the appearance of death as much as he
                    could.  The Bear soon left him, for it is said he will not touch
                    a dead body.  When he was quite gone, the other Traveler
                    descended from the tree, and jocularly inquired of his friend
                    what it was the Bear had whispered in his ear.  "He gave me this
                    advice," his companion replied.  "Never travel with a friend who
                    deserts you at the approach of danger."

                    Misfortune tests the sincerity of friends.


                    The Oxen and the Axle-Trees

                    A HEAVY WAGON was being dragged along a country lane by a team of
                    Oxen.  The Axle-trees groaned and creaked terribly; whereupon the
                    Oxen, turning round, thus addressed the wheels:  "Hullo there! why
                    do you make so much noise? We bear all the labor, and we, not
                    you, ought to cry out."

                    Those who suffer most cry out the least.


                    The Thirsty Pigeon

                    A PIGEON, oppressed by excessive thirst, saw a goblet of water
                    painted on a signboard.  Not supposing it to be only a picture,
                    she flew towards it with a loud whir and unwittingly dashed
                    against the signboard, jarring herself terribly.  Having broken
                    her wings by the blow, she fell to the ground, and was caught by
                    one of the bystanders.

                    Zeal should not outrun discretion.


                    The Raven and the Swan

                    A RAVEN saw a Swan and desired to secure for himself the same
                    beautiful plumage.  Supposing that the Swan's splendid white
                    color arose from his washing in the water in which he swam, the
                    Raven left the altars in the neighborhood where he picked up his
                    living, and took up residence in the lakes and pools.  But
                    cleansing his feathers as often as he would, he could not change
                    their color, while through want of food he perished.

                    Change of habit cannot alter Nature.


                    The Goat and the Goatherd

                    A GOATHERD had sought to bring back a stray goat to his flock.
                    He whistled and sounded his horn in vain; the straggler paid no
                    attention to the summons.  At last the Goatherd threw a stone,
                    and breaking its horn, begged the Goat not to tell his master.
                    The Goat replied, "Why, you silly fellow, the horn will speak
                    though I be silent."

                    Do not attempt to hide things which cannot be hid.


                    The Miser

                    A MISER sold all that he had and bought a lump of gold, which he
                    buried in a hole in the ground by the side of an old wall and
                    went to look at daily.  One of his workmen observed his frequent
                    visits to the spot and decided to watch his movements.  He soon
                    discovered the secret of the hidden treasure, and digging down,
                    came to the lump of gold, and stole it.  The Miser, on his next
                    visit, found the hole empty and began to tear his hair and to
                    make loud lamentations.  A neighbor, seeing him overcome with
                    grief and learning the cause, said, "Pray do not grieve so; but
                    go and take a stone, and place it in the hole, and fancy that the
                    gold is still lying there.  It will do you quite the same
                    service; for when the gold was there, you had it not, as you did
                    not make the slightest use of it."


                    The Sick Lion

                    A LION, unable from old age and infirmities to provide himself
                    with food by force, resolved to do so by artifice.  He returned
                    to his den, and lying down there, pretended to be sick, taking
                    care that his sickness should be publicly known.  The beasts
                    expressed their sorrow, and came one by one to his den, where the
                    Lion devoured them.  After many of the beasts had thus
                    disappeared, the Fox discovered the trick and presenting himself
                    to the Lion, stood on the outside of the cave, at a respectful
                    distance, and asked him how he was.  "I am very middling,"
                    replied the Lion, "but why do you stand without? Pray enter
                    within to talk with me."  "No, thank you," said the Fox.  "I
                    notice that there are many prints of feet entering your cave, but
                    I see no trace of any returning."

                    He is wise who is warned by the misfortunes of others.


                    The Horse and Groom

                    A GROOM used to spend whole days in currycombing and rubbing down
                    his Horse, but at the same time stole his oats and sold them for
                    his own profit.  "Alas!"  said the Horse, "if you really wish me
                    to be in good condition, you should groom me less, and feed me
                    more."


                    The and the Lapdog

                    A MAN had an, and a Maltese Lapdog, a very great beauty.  The
                    was left in a stable and had plenty of oats and hay to eat,
                    just as any other would.  The Lapdog knew many tricks and was
                    a great favorite with his master, who often fondled him and
                    seldom went out to dine without bringing him home some tidbit to
                    eat.  The, on the contrary, had much work to do in grinding
                    the corn-mill and in carrying wood from the forest or burdens
                    from the farm.  He often lamented his own hard fate and
                    contrasted it with the luxury and idleness of the Lapdog, till at
                    last one day he broke his cords and halter, and galloped into his
                    master's house, kicking up his heels without measure, and
                    frisking and fawning as well as he could.  He next tried to jump
                    about his master as he had seen the Lapdog do, but he broke the
                    table and smashed all the dishes upon it to atoms.  He then
                    attempted to lick his master, and jumped upon his back.  The
                    servants, hearing the strange hubbub and perceiving the danger of
                    their master, quickly relieved him, and drove out the to his
                    stable with kicks and clubs and cuffs.  The, as he returned
                    to his stall beaten nearly to death, thus lamented:  "I have
                    brought it all on myself! Why could I not have been contented to
                    labor with my companions, and not wish to be idle all the day
                    like that useless little Lapdog!"


                    The Lioness

                    A CONTROVERSY prevailed among the beasts of the field as to which
                    of the animals deserved the most credit for producing the
                    greatest number of whelps at a birth.  They rushed clamorously
                    into the presence of the Lioness and demanded of her the
                    settlement of the dispute.  "And you," they said, "how many sons
                    have you at a birth?'  The Lioness laughed at them, and said:
                    "Why! I have only one; but that one is altogether a thoroughbred
                    Lion."

                    The value is in the worth, not in the number.


                    The Boasting Traveler

                    A MAN who had traveled in foreign lands boasted very much, on
                    returning to his own country, of the many wonderful and heroic
                    feats he had performed in the different places he had visited.
                    Among other things, he said that when he was at Rhodes he had
                    leaped to such a distance that no man of his day could leap
                    anywhere near him as to that, there were in Rhodes many persons
                    who saw him do it and whom he could call as witnesses.  One of
                    the bystanders interrupted him, saying:  "Now, my good man, if
                    this be all true there is no need of witnesses.  Suppose this
                    to be Rhodes, and leap for us."


                    The Cat and the Cock

                    A CAT caught a Cock, and pondered how he might find a reasonable
                    excuse for eating him.  He accused him of being a nuisance to men
                    by crowing in the nighttime and not permitting them to sleep.
                    The Cock defended himself by saying that he did this for the
                    benefit of men, that they might rise in time for their labors.
                    The Cat replied, "Although you abound in specious apologies, I
                    shall not remain supperless"; and he made a meal of him.


                    The Piglet, the Sheep, and the Goat

                    A YOUNG PIG was shut up in a fold-yard with a Goat and a Sheep.
                    On one occasion when the shepherd laid hold of him, he grunted
                    and squeaked and resisted violently.  The Sheep and the Goat
                    complained of his distressing cries, saying, "He often handles
                    us, and we do not cry out."  To this the Pig replied, "Your
                    handling and mine are very different things.  He catches you only
                    for your wool, or your milk, but he lays hold on me for my very
                    life."


                    The Boy and the Filberts

                    A BOY put his hand into a pitcher full of filberts.  He grasped
                    as many as he could possibly hold, but when he tried to pull out
                    his hand, he was prevented from doing so by the neck of the
                    pitcher.  Unwilling to lose his filberts, and yet unable to
                    withdraw his hand, he burst into tears and bitterly lamented his
                    disappointment.  A bystander said to him, "Be satisfied with half
                    the quantity, and you will readily draw out your hand."

                    Do not attempt too much at once.


                    The Lion in Love

                    A LION demanded the daughter of a woodcutter in marriage.  The
                    Father, unwilling to grant, and yet afraid to refuse his request,
                    hit upon this expedient to rid himself of his importunities.  He
                    expressed his willingness to accept the Lion as the suitor of his
                    daughter on one condition:  that he should allow him to extract
                    his teeth, and cut off his claws, as his daughter was fearfully
                    afraid of both.  The Lion cheerfully assented to the proposal.
                    But when the toothless, clawless Lion returned to repeat his
                    request, the Woodman, no longer afraid, set upon him with his
                    club, and drove him away into the forest.


                    The Laborer and the Snake

                    A SNAKE, having made his hole close to the porch of a cottage,
                    inflicted a mortal bite on the Cottager's infant son.  Grieving
                    over his loss, the Father resolved to kill the Snake.  The next
                    day, when it came out of its hole for food, he took up his axe,
                    but by swinging too hastily, missed its head and cut off only the
                    end of its tail.  After some time the Cottager, afraid that the
                    Snake would bite him also, endeavored to make peace, and placed
                    some bread and salt in the hole.  The Snake, slightly hissing,
                    said:  "There can henceforth be no peace between us; for whenever
                    I see you I shall remember the loss of my tail, and whenever you
                    see me you will be thinking of the death of your son."

                    No one truly forgets injuries in the presence of him who caused
                    the injury.


                    The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing

                    ONCE UPON A TIME a Wolf resolved to disguise his appearance in
                    order to secure food more easily.  Encased in the skin of a
                    sheep, he pastured with the flock deceiving the shepherd by his
                    costume.  In the evening he was shut up by the shepherd in the
                    fold; the gate was closed, and the entrance made thoroughly
                    secure.  But the shepherd, returning to the fold during the night
                    to obtain meat for the next day, mistakenly caught up the Wolf
                    instead of a sheep, and killed him instantly.

                    Harm seek.  harm find.


                    The and the Mule

                    A MULETEER set forth on a journey, driving before him an and
                    a Mule, both well laden.  The, as long as he traveled along
                    the plain, carried his load with ease, but when he began to
                    ascend the steep path of the mountain, felt his load to be more
                    than he could bear.  He entreated his companion to relieve him of
                    a small portion, that he might carry home the rest; but the Mule
                    paid no attention to the request.  The shortly afterwards
                    fell down dead under his burden.  Not knowing what else to do in
                    so wild a region, the Muleteer placed upon the Mule the load
                    carried by the in addition to his own, and at the top of all
                    placed the hide of the, after he had skinned him.  The Mule,
                    groaning beneath his heavy burden, said to himself:  "I am treated
                    according to my deserts.  If I had only been willing to assist
                    the a little in his need, I should not now be bearing,
                    together with his burden, himself as well."


                    The Frogs Asking for a King

                    THE FROGS, grieved at having no established Ruler, sent
                    ambassadors to Jupiter entreating for a King.  Perceiving their
                    simplicity, he cast down a huge log into the lake.  The Frogs
                    were terrified at the splash occasioned by its fall and hid
                    themselves in the depths of the pool.  But as soon as they
                    realized that the huge log was motionless, they swam again to the
                    top of the water, dismissed their fears, climbed up, and began
                    squatting on it in contempt.  After some time they began to think
                    themselves ill-treated in the appointment of so inert a Ruler,
                    and sent a second deputation to Jupiter to pray that he would set
                    over them another sovereign.  He then gave them an Eel to govern
                    them.  When the Frogs discovered his easy good nature, they sent
                    yet a third time to Jupiter to beg him to choose for them still
                    another King.  Jupiter, displeased with all their complaints,
                    sent a Heron, who preyed upon the Frogs day by day till there
                    were none left to croak upon the lake.


                    The Boys and the Frogs

                    SOME BOYS, playing near a pond, saw a number of Frogs in the
                    water and began to pelt them with stones.  They killed several of
                    them, when one of the Frogs, lifting his head out of the water,
                    cried out:  "Pray stop, my boys:  what is sport to you, is death to
                    us."


                    The Sick Stag

                    A SICK STAG lay down in a quiet corner of its pasture-ground.
                    His companions came in great numbers to inquire after his health,
                    and each one helped himself to a share of the food which had been
                    placed for his use; so that he died, not from his sickness, but
                    from the failure of the means of living.

                    Evil companions bring more hurt than profit.


                    The Salt Merchant and His

                    A PEDDLER drove his to the seashore to buy salt.  His road
                    home lay across a stream into which his, making a false step,
                    fell by accident and rose up again with his load considerably
                    lighter, as the water melted the sack.  The Peddler retraced his
                    steps and refilled his panniers with a larger quantity of salt
                    than before.  When he came again to the stream, the fell down
                    on purpose in the same spot, and, regaining his feet with the
                    weight of his load much diminished, brayed triumphantly as if he
                    had obtained what he desired.  The Peddler saw through his trick
                    and drove him for the third time to the coast, where he bought a
                    cargo of sponges instead of salt.  The, again playing the
                    fool, fell down on purpose when he reached the stream, but the
                    sponges became swollen with water, greatly increasing his load.
                    And thus his trick recoiled on him, for he now carried on his
                    back a double burden.


                    The Oxen and the Butchers

                    THE OXEN once upon a time sought to destroy the Butchers, who
                    practiced a trade destructive to their race.  They assembled on a
                    certain day to carry out their purpose, and sharpened their horns
                    for the contest.  But one of them who was exceedingly old (for
                    many a field had he plowed) thus spoke:  "These Butchers, it is
                    true, slaughter us, but they do so with skillful hands, and with
                    no unnecessary pain.  If we get rid of them, we shall fall into
                    the hands of unskillful operators, and thus suffer a double
                    death:  for you may be assured, that though all the Butchers
                    should perish, yet will men never want beef."

                    Do not be in a hurry to change one evil for another.


                    The Lion, the Mouse, and the Fox

                    A LION, fatigued by the heat of a summer's day, fell fast asleep
                    in his den.  A Mouse ran over his mane and ears and woke him from
                    his slumbers.  He rose up and shook himself in great wrath, and
                    searched every corner of his den to find the Mouse.  A Fox seeing
                    him said:  "A fine Lion you are, to be frightened of a Mouse."
                    "'Tis not the Mouse I fear," said the Lion; "I resent his
                    familiarity and ill-breeding."

                    Little liberties are great offenses.


                    The Vain Jackdaw

                    JUPITER DETERMINED, it is said, to create a sovereign over the
                    birds, and made proclamation that on a certain day they should
                    all present themselves before him, when he would himself choose
                    the most beautiful among them to be king.  The Jackdaw, knowing
                    his own ugliness, searched through the woods and fields, and
                    collected the feathers which had fallen from the wings of his
                    companions, and stuck them in all parts of his body, hoping
                    thereby to make himself the most beautiful of all.  When the
                    appointed day arrived, and the birds had assembled before
                    Jupiter, the Jackdaw also made his appearance in his many
                    feathered finery.  But when Jupiter proposed to make him king
                    because of the beauty of his plumage, the birds indignantly
                    protested, and each plucked from him his own feathers, leaving
                    the Jackdaw nothing but a Jackdaw.


                    The Goatherd and the Wild Goats

                    A GOATHERD, driving his flock from their pasture at eventide,
                    found some Wild Goats mingled among them, and shut them up
                    together with his own for the night.  The next day it snowed very
                    hard, so that he could not take the herd to their usual feeding
                    places, but was obliged to keep them in the fold.  He gave his
                    own goats just sufficient food to keep them alive, but fed the
                    strangers more abundantly in the hope of enticing them to stay
                    with him and of making them his own.  When the thaw set in, he
                    led them all out to feed, and the Wild Goats scampered away as
                    fast as they could to the mountains.  The Goatherd scolded them
                    for their ingratitude in leaving him, when during the storm he
                    had taken more care of them than of his own herd.  One of them,
                    turning about, said to him:  "That is the very reason why we are
                    so cautious; for if you yesterday treated us better than the
                    Goats you have had so long, it is plain also that if others came
                    after us, you would in the same manner prefer them to ourselves."


                    Old friends cannot with impunity be sacrificed for new ones.


                    The Mischievous Dog

                    A DOG used to run up quietly to the heels of everyone he met, and
                    to bite them without notice.  His master suspended a bell about
                    his neck so that the Dog might give notice of his presence
                    wherever he went.  Thinking it a mark of distinction, the Dog
                    grew proud of his bell and went tinkling it all over the
                    marketplace.  One day an old hound said to him:  Why do you make
                    such an exhibition of yourself? That bell that you carry is not,
                    believe me, any order of merit, but on the contrary a mark of
                    disgrace, a public notice to all men to avoid you as an ill
                    mannered dog."

                    Notoriety is often mistaken for fame.


                    The Fox Who Had Lost His Tail

                    A FOX caught in a trap escaped, but in so doing lost his tail.
                    Thereafter, feeling his life a burden from the shame and ridicule
                    to which he was exposed, he schemed to convince all the other
                    Foxes that being tailless was much more attractive, thus making
                    up for his own deprivation.  He assembled a good many Foxes and
                    publicly advised them to cut off their tails, saying that they
                    would not only look much better without them, but that they would
                    get rid of the weight of the brush, which was a very great
                    inconvenience.  One of them interrupting him said, "If you had
                    not yourself lost your tail, my friend, you would not thus
                    counsel us."


                    The Boy and the Nettles

                    A BOY was stung by a Nettle.  He ran home and told his Mother,
                    saying, "Although it hurts me very much, I only touched it
                    gently."  "That was just why it stung you," said his Mother.  "The
                    next time you touch a Nettle, grasp it boldly, and it will be
                    soft as silk to your hand, and not in the least hurt you."

                    Whatever you do, do with all your might.


                    The Man and His Two Sweethearts

                    A MIDDLE-AGED MAN, whose hair had begun to turn gray, courted two
                    women at the same time.  One of them was young, and the other
                    well advanced in years.  The elder woman, ashamed to be courted
                    by a man younger than herself, made a point, whenever her admirer
                    visited her, to pull out some portion of his black hairs.  The
                    younger, on the contrary, not wishing to become the wife of an
                    old man, was equally zealous in removing every gray hair she
                    could find.  Thus it came to pass that between them both he very
                    soon found that he had not a hair left on his head.

                    Those who seek to please everybody please nobody.


                    The Astronomer

                    AN ASTRONOMER used to go out at night to observe the stars.  One
                    evening, as he wandered through the suburbs with his whole
                    attention fixed on the sky, he fell accidentally into a deep
                    well.  While he lamented and bewailed his sores and bruises, and
                    cried loudly for help, a neighbor ran to the well, and learning
                    what had happened said:  "Hark ye, old fellow, why, in striving to
                    pry into what is in heaven, do you not manage to see what is on
                    earth?'


                    The Wolves and the Sheep

                    "WHY SHOULD there always be this fear and slaughter between us?"
                    said the Wolves to the Sheep.  "Those evil-disposed Dogs have
                    much to answer for.  They always bark whenever we approach you
                    and attack us before we have done any harm.  If you would only
                    dismiss them from your heels, there might soon be treaties of
                    peace and reconciliation between us."  The Sheep, poor silly
                    creatures, were easily beguiled and dismissed the Dogs, whereupon
                    the Wolves destroyed the unguarded flock at their own pleasure.


                    The Old Woman and the Physician

                    AN OLD WOMAN having lost the use of her eyes, called in a
                    Physician to heal them, and made this bargain with him in the
                    presence of witnesses:  that if he should cure her blindness, he
                    should receive from her a sum of money; but if her infirmity
                    remained, she should give him nothing.  This agreement being
                    made, the Physician, time after time, applied his salve to her
                    eyes, and on every visit took something away, stealing all her
                    property little by little.  And when he had got all she had, he
                    healed her and demanded the promised payment.  The Old Woman,
                    when she recovered her sight and saw none of her goods in her
                    house, would give him nothing.  The Physician insisted on his
                    claim, and.  as she still refused, summoned her before the Judge.
                    The Old Woman, standing up in the Court, argued:  "This man here
                    speaks the truth in what he says; for I did promise to give him a
                    sum of money if I should recover my sight:  but if I continued
                    blind, I was to give him nothing.  Now he declares that I am
                    healed.  I on the contrary affirm that I am still blind; for when
                    I lost the use of my eyes, I saw in my house various chattels and
                    valuable goods:  but now, though he swears I am cured of my
                    blindness, I am not able to see a single thing in it."


                    The Fighting Cocks and the Eagle

                    TWO GAME COCKS were fiercely fighting for the mastery of the
                    farmyard.  One at last put the other to flight.  The vanquished
                    Cock skulked away and hid himself in a quiet corner, while the
                    conqueror, flying up to a high wall, flapped his wings and crowed
                    exultingly with all his might.  An Eagle sailing through the air
                    pounced upon him and carried him off in his talons.  The
                    vanquished Cock immediately came out of his corner, and ruled
                    henceforth with undisputed mastery.

                    Pride goes before destruction.


                    The Charger and the Miller

                    A CHARGER, feeling the infirmities of age, was sent to work in a
                    mill instead of going out to battle.  But when he was compelled
                    to grind instead of serving in the wars, he bewailed his change
                    of fortune and called to mind his former state, saying, "Ah!
                    Miller, I had indeed to go campaigning before, but I was barbed
                    from counter to tail, and a man went along to groom me; and now I
                    cannot understand what ailed me to prefer the mill before the
                    battle."  "Forbear," said the Miller to him, "harping on what was
                    of yore, for it is the common lot of mortals to sustain the ups
                    and downs of fortune."


                    The Fox and the Monkey

                    A MONKEY once danced in an assembly of the Beasts, and so pleased
                    them all by his performance that they elected him their King.  A
                    Fox, envying him the honor, discovered a piece of meat lying in a
                    trap, and leading the Monkey to the place where it was, said that
                    she had found a store, but had not used it  e had kept it for him
                    as treasure trove of his kingdom, and counseled him to lay hold
                    of it.  The Monkey approached carelessly and was caught in the
                    trap; and on his accusing the Fox of purposely leading him into
                    the snare, she replied, "O Monkey, and are you, with such a mind
                    as yours, going to be King over the Beasts?"


                    The Horse and His Rider

                    A HORSE SOLDIER took the utmost pains with his charger.  As long
                    as the war lasted, he looked upon him as his fellow-helper in all
                    emergencies and fed him carefully with hay and corn.  But when
                    the war was over, he only allowed him chaff to eat and made him
                    carry heavy loads of wood, subjecting him to much slavish
                    drudgery and ill-treatment.  War was again proclaimed, however,
                    and when the trumpet summoned him to his standard, the Soldier
                    put on his charger its military trappings, and mounted, being
                    clad in his heavy coat of mail.  The Horse fell down straightway
                    under the weight, no longer equal to the burden, and said to his
                    master, "You must now go to the war on foot, for you have
                    transformed me from a Horse into an; and how can you expect
                    that I can again turn in a moment from an to a Horse?'


                    The Belly and the Members

                    THE MEMBERS of the Body rebelled against the Belly, and said,
                    "Why should we be perpetually engaged in administering to your
                    wants, while you do nothing but take your rest, and enjoy
                    yourself in luxury and self-indulgence?'  The Members carried out
                    their resolve and refused their assistance to the Belly.  The
                    whole Body quickly became debilitated, and the hands, feet,
                    mouth, and eyes, when too late, repented of their folly.


                    The Vine and the Goat

                    A VINE was luxuriant in the time of vintage with leaves and
                    grapes.  A Goat, passing by, nibbled its young tendrils and its
                    leaves.  The Vine addressed him and said:  "Why do you thus injure
                    me without a cause, and crop my leaves? Is there no young grass
                    left? But I shall not have to wait long for my just revenge; for
                    if you now should crop my leaves, and cut me down to my root, I
                    shall provide the wine to pour over you when you are led as a
                    victim to the sacrifice."


                    Jupiter and the Monkey

                    JUPITER ISSUED a proclamation to all the beasts of the forest and
                    promised a royal reward to the one whose offspring should be
                    deemed the handsomest.  The Monkey came with the rest and
                    presented, with all a mother's tenderness, a flat-nosed,
                    hairless, ill-featured young Monkey as a candidate for the
                    promised reward.  A general laugh saluted her on the presentation
                    of her son.  She resolutely said, "I know not whether Jupiter
                    will allot the prize to my son, but this I do know, that he is at
                    least in the eyes of me his mother, the dearest, handsomest, and
                    most beautiful of all."


                    The Widow and Her Little Maidens

                    A WIDOW who was fond of cleaning had two little maidens to wait
                    on her.  She was in the habit of waking them early in the
                    morning, at cockcrow.  The maidens, aggravated by such excessive
                    labor, resolved to kill the cock who roused their mistress so
                    early.  When they had done this, they found that they had only
                    prepared for themselves greater troubles, for their mistress, no
                    longer hearing the hour from the cock, woke them up to their work
                    in the middle of the night.


                    The Shepherd's Boy and the Wolf

                    A SHEPHERD-BOY, who watched a flock of sheep near a village,
                    brought out the villagers three or four times by crying out,
                    "Wolf! Wolf!"  and when his neighbors came to help him, laughed at
                    them for their pains.  The Wolf, however, did truly come at last.
                    The Shepherd-boy, now really alarmed, shouted in an agony of
                    terror:  "Pray, do come and help me; the Wolf is killing the
                    sheep"; but no one paid any heed to his cries, nor rendered any
                    assistance.  The Wolf, having no cause of fear, at his leisure
                    lacerated or destroyed the whole flock.

                    There is no believing a liar, even when he speaks the truth.


                    The Cat and the Birds

                    A CAT, hearing that the Birds in a certain aviary were ailing
                    dressed himself up as a physician, and, taking his cane and a bag
                    of instruments becoming his profession, went to call on them.  He
                    knocked at the door and inquired of the inmates how they all did,
                    saying that if they were ill, he would be happy to prescribe for
                    them and cure them.  They replied, "We are all very well, and
                    shall continue so, if you will only be good enough to go away,
                    and leave us as we are."


                    The Kid and the Wolf

                    A KID standing on the roof of a house, out of harm's way, saw a
                    Wolf passing by and immediately began to taunt and revile him.
                    The Wolf, looking up, said, "Sirrah! I hear thee:  yet it is not
                    thou who mockest me, but the roof on which thou art standing."

                    Time and place often give the advantage to the weak over the
                    strong.


                    The Ox and the Frog

                    AN OX drinking at a pool trod on a brood of young frogs and
                    crushed one of them to death.  The Mother coming up, and missing
                    one of her sons, inquired of his brothers what had become of him.
                    "He is dead, dear Mother; for just now a very huge beast with
                    four great feet came to the pool and crushed him to death with
                    his cloven heel."  The Frog, puffing herself out, inquired, "if
                    the beast was as big as that in size."  "Cease, Mother, to puff
                    yourself out," said her son, "and do not be angry; for you would,
                    I assure you, sooner burst than successfully imitate the hugeness
                    of that monster."


                    The Shepherd and the Wolf

                     A SHEPHERD once found the whelp of a Wolf and brought it up, and
                    after a while taught it to steal lambs from the neighboring
                    flocks.  The Wolf, having shown himself an apt pupil, said to the
                    Shepherd, "Since you have taught me to steal, you must keep a
                    sharp lookout, or you will lose some of your own flock."


                    The Father and His Two Daughters

                    A MAN had two daughters, the one married to a gardener, and the
                    other to a tile-maker.  After a time he went to the daughter who
                    had married the gardener, and inquired how she was and how all
                    things went with her.  She said, "All things are prospering with
                    me, and I have only one wish, that there may be a heavy fall of
                    rain, in order that the plants may be well watered."  Not long
                    after, he went to the daughter who had married the tilemaker, and
                    likewise inquired of her how she fared; she replied, "I want for
                    nothing, and have only one wish, that the dry weather may
                    continue, and the sun shine hot and bright, so that the bricks
                    might be dried."  He said to her, "If your sister wishes for rain,
                    and you for dry weather, with which of the two am I to join my
                    wishes?'


                    The Farmer and His Sons

                    A FATHER, being on the point of death, wished to be sure that his
                    sons would give the same attention to his farm as he himself had
                    given it.  He called them to his bedside and said, "My sons,
                    there is a great treasure hid in one of my vineyards."  The sons,
                    after his death, took their spades and mattocks and carefully dug
                    over every portion of their land.  They found no treasure, but
                    the vines repaid their labor by an extraordinary and
                    superabundant crop.


                    The Crab and Its Mother

                    A CRAB said to her son, "Why do you walk so one-sided, my child?
                    It is far more becoming to go straight forward."  The young Crab
                    replied:  "Quite true, dear Mother; and if you will show me the
                    straight way, I will promise to walk in it."  The Mother tried in
                    vain, and submitted without remonstrance to the reproof of her
                    child.

                    Example is more powerful than precept.


                    The Heifer and the Ox

                    A HEIFER saw an Ox hard at work harnessed to a plow, and
                    tormented him with reflections on his unhappy fate in being
                    compelled to labor.  Shortly afterwards, at the harvest festival,
                    the owner released the Ox from his yoke, but bound the Heifer
                    with cords and led him away to the altar to be slain in honor of
                    the occasion.  The Ox saw what was being done, and said with a
                    smile to the Heifer:  "For this you were allowed to live in
                    idleness, because you were presently to be sacrificed."


                    The Swallow, the Serpent, and the Court of Justice

                    A SWALLOW, returning from abroad and especially fond of dwelling
                    with men, built herself a nest in the wall of a Court of Justice
                    and there hatched seven young birds.  A Serpent gliding past the
                    nest from its hole in the wall ate up the young unfledged
                    nestlings.  The Swallow, finding her nest empty, lamented greatly
                    and exclaimed:  "Woe to me a stranger! that in this place where
                    all others' rights are protected, I alone should suffer wrong."


                    The Thief and His Mother

                    A BOY stole a lesson-book from one of his schoolfellows and took
                    it home to his Mother.  She not only abstained from beating him,
                    but encouraged him.  He next time stole a cloak and brought it to
                    her, and she again commended him.  The Youth, advanced to
                    adulthood, proceeded to steal things of still greater value.  At
                    last he was caught in the very act, and having his hands bound
                    behind him, was led away to the place of public execution.  His
                    Mother followed in the crowd and violently beat her breast in
                    sorrow, whereupon the young man said, "I wish to say something to
                    my Mother in her ear."  She came close to him, and he quickly
                    seized her ear with his teeth and bit it off.  The Mother
                    upbraided him as an unnatural child, whereon he replied, "Ah! if
                    you had beaten me when I first stole and brought to you that
                    lesson-book, I should not have come to this, nor have been thus
                    led to a disgraceful death."


                    The Old Man and Death

                    AN OLD MAN was employed in cutting wood in the forest, and, in
                    carrying the faggots to the city for sale one day, became very
                    wearied with his long journey.  He sat down by the wayside, and
                    throwing down his load, besought "Death" to come.  "Death"
                    immediately appeared in answer to his summons and asked for what
                    reason he had called him.  The Old Man hurriedly replied, "That,
                    lifting up the load, you may place it again upon my shoulders."


                    The Fir-Tree and the Bramble

                    A FIR-TREE said boastingly to the Bramble, "You are useful for
                    nothing at all; while I am everywhere used for roofs and houses."
                    The Bramble answered:  'You poor creature, if you would only call
                    to mind the axes and saws which are about to hew you down, you
                    would have reason to wish that you had grown up a Bramble, not a
                    Fir-Tree."

                    Better poverty without care, than riches with.


                    The Mouse, the Frog, and the Hawk

                    A MOUSE who always lived on the land, by an unlucky chance formed
                    an intimate acquaintance with a Frog, who lived for the most part
                    in the water.  The Frog, one day intent on mischief, bound the
                    foot of the Mouse tightly to his own.  Thus joined together, the
                    Frog first of all led his friend the Mouse to the meadow where
                    they were accustomed to find their food.  After this, he
                    gradually led him towards the pool in which he lived, until
                    reaching the very brink, he suddenly jumped in, dragging the
                    Mouse with him.  The Frog enjoyed the water amazingly, and swam
                    croaking about, as if he had done a good deed.  The unhappy Mouse
                    was soon suffocated by the water, and his dead body floated about
                    on the surface, tied to the foot of the Frog.  A Hawk observed
                    it, and, pouncing upon it with his talons, carried it aloft.  The
                    Frog, being still fastened to the leg of the Mouse, was also
                    carried off a prisoner, and was eaten by the Hawk.

                    Harm hatch, harm catch.


                    The Man Bitten by a Dog

                    A MAN who had been bitten by a Dog went about in quest of someone
                    who might heal him.  A friend, meeting him and learning what he
                    wanted, said, "If you would be cured, take a piece of bread, and
                    dip it in the blood from your wound, and go and give it to the
                    Dog that bit you."  The Man who had been bitten laughed at this
                    advice and said, "Why? If I should do so, it would be as if I
                    should beg every Dog in the town to bite me."

                    Benefits bestowed upon the evil-disposed increase their means of
                    injuring you.


                    The Two Pots

                    A RIVER carried down in its stream two Pots, one made of
                    earthenware and the other of brass.  The Earthen Pot said to the
                    Brass Pot, "Pray keep at a distance and do not come near me, for
                    if you touch me ever so slightly, I shall be broken in pieces,
                    and besides, I by no means wish to come near you."

                    Equals make the best friends.


                    The Wolf and the Sheep

                    A WOLF, sorely wounded and bitten by dogs, lay sick and maimed in
                    his lair.  Being in want of food, he called to a Sheep who was
                    passing, and asked him to fetch some water from a stream flowing
                    close beside him.  "For," he said, "if you will bring me drink, I
                    will find means to provide myself with meat."  "Yes," said the
                    Sheep, "if I should bring you the draught, you would doubtless
                    make me provide the meat also."

                    Hypocritical speeches are easily seen through.


                    The Aethiop

                    THE PURCHASER of a black servant was persuaded that the color of
                    his skin arose from dirt contracted through the neglect of his
                    former masters.  On bringing him home he resorted to every means
                    of cleaning, and subjected the man to incessant scrubbings.  The
                    servant caught a severe cold, but he never changed his color or
                    complexion.

                    What's bred in the bone will stick to the flesh.


                    The Fisherman and His Nets

                    A FISHERMAN, engaged in his calling, made a very successful cast
                    and captured a great haul of fish.  He managed by a skillful
                    handling of his net to retain all the large fish and to draw them
                    to the shore; but he could not prevent the smaller fish from
                    falling back through the meshes of the net into the sea.


                    The Huntsman and the Fisherman

                    A HUNTSMAN, returning with his dogs from the field, fell in by
                    chance with a Fisherman who was bringing home a basket well laden
                    with fish.  The Huntsman wished to have the fish, and their owner
                    experienced an equal longing for the contents of the game-bag.
                    They quickly agreed to exchange the produce of their day's sport.
                    Each was so well pleased with his bargain that they made for some
                    time the same exchange day after day.  Finally a neighbor said to
                    them, "If you go on in this way, you will soon destroy by
                    frequent use the pleasure of your exchange, and each will again
                    wish to retain the fruits of his own sport."

                    Abstain and enjoy.


                    The Old Woman and the Wine-Jar

                    AN OLD WOMAN found an empty jar which had lately been full of
                    prime old wine and which still retained the fragrant smell of its
                    former contents.  She greedily placed it several times to her
                    nose, and drawing it backwards and forwards said, "O most
                    delicious! How nice must the Wine itself have been, when it
                    leaves behind in the very vessel which contained it so sweet a
                    perfume!"

                    The memory of a good deed lives.


                    The Fox and the Crow

                    A CROW having stolen a bit of meat, perched in a tree and held it
                    in her beak.  A Fox, seeing this, longed to possess the meat
                    himself, and by a wily stratagem succeeded.  "How handsome is the
                    Crow," he exclaimed, in the beauty of her shape and in the
                    fairness of her complexion! Oh, if her voice were only equal to
                    her beauty, she would deservedly be considered the Queen of
                    Birds!"  This he said deceitfully; but the Crow, anxious to refute
                    the reflection cast upon her voice, set up a loud caw and dropped
                    the flesh.  The Fox quickly picked it up, and thus addressed the
                    Crow:  "My good Crow, your voice is right enough, but your wit is
                    wanting."


                    The Two Dogs

                    A MAN had two dogs:  a Hound, trained to assist him in his sports,
                    and a Housedog, taught to watch the house.  When he returned home
                    after a good day's sport, he always gave the Housedog a large
                    share of his spoil.  The Hound, feeling much aggrieved at this,
                    reproached his companion, saying, "It is very hard to have all
                    this labor, while you, who do not assist in the chase, luxuriate
                    on the fruits of my exertions."  The Housedog replied, "Do not
                    blame me, my friend, but find fault with the master, who has not
                    taught me to labor, but to depend for subsistence on the labor of
                    others."

                    Children are not to be blamed for the faults of their parents.


                    The Stag in the Ox-Stall

                    A STAG, roundly chased by the hounds and blinded by fear to the
                    danger he was running into, took shelter in a farmyard and hid
                    himself in a shed among the oxen.  An Ox gave him this kindly
                    warning:  "O unhappy creature! why should you thus, of your own
                    accord, incur destruction and trust yourself in the house of your
                    enemy?'  The Stag replied:  "Only allow me, friend, to stay where I
                    am, and I will undertake to find some favorable opportunity of
                    effecting my escape."  At the approach of the evening the herdsman
                    came to feed his cattle, but did not see the Stag; and even the
                    farm-bailiff with several laborers passed through the shed and
                    failed to notice him.  The Stag, congratulating himself on his
                    safety, began to express his sincere thanks to the Oxen who had
                    kindly helped him in the hour of need.  One of them again
                    answered him:  "We indeed wish you well, but the danger is not
                    over.  There is one other yet to pass through the shed, who has
                    as it were a hundred eyes, and until he has come and gone, your
                    life is still in peril."  At that moment the master himself
                    entered, and having had to complain that his oxen had not been
                    properly fed, he went up to their racks and cried out:  "Why is
                    there such a scarcity of fodder? There is not half enough straw
                    for them to lie on.  Those lazy fellows have not even swept the
                    cobwebs away."  While he thus examined everything in turn, he
                    spied the tips of the antlers of the Stag peeping out of the
                    straw.  Then summoning his laborers, he ordered that the Stag
                    should be seized and killed.


                    The Hawk, the Kite, and the Pigeons

                    THE PIGEONS, terrified by the appearance of a Kite, called upon
                    the Hawk to defend them.  He at once consented.  When they had
                    admitted him into the cote, they found that he made more havoc
                    and slew a larger number of them in one day than the Kite could
                    pounce upon in a whole year.

                    Avoid a remedy that is worse than the disease.


                    The Widow and the Sheep

                    A CERTAIN poor widow had one solitary Sheep.  At shearing time,
                    wishing to take his fleece and to avoid expense, she sheared him
                    herself, but used the shears so unskillfully that with the fleece
                    she sheared the flesh.  The Sheep, writhing with pain, said, "Why
                    do you hurt me so, Mistress? What weight can my blood add to the
                    wool? If you want my flesh, there is the butcher, who will kill
                    me in an instant; but if you want my fleece and wool, there is
                    the shearer, who will shear and not hurt me."

                    The least outlay is not always the greatest gain.


                    The Wild and the Lion

                    A WILD and a Lion entered into an alliance so that they might
                    capture the beasts of the forest with greater ease.  The Lion
                    agreed to assist the Wild with his strength, while the Wild
                    gave the Lion the benefit of his greater speed.  When they
                    had taken as many beasts as their necessities required, the Lion
                    undertook to distribute the prey, and for this purpose divided it
                    into three shares.  "I will take the first share," he said,
                    "because I am King:  and the second share, as a partner with you
                    in the chase:  and the third share (believe me) will be a source
                    of great evil to you, unless you willingly resign it to me, and
                    set off as fast as you can."

                    Might makes right.


                    The Eagle and the Arrow

                    AN EAGLE sat on a lofty rock, watching the movements of a Hare
                    whom he sought to make his prey.  An archer, who saw the Eagle
                    from a place of concealment, took an accurate aim and wounded him
                    mortally.  The Eagle gave one look at the arrow that had entered
                    his heart and saw in that single glance that its feathers had
                    been furnished by himself.  "It is a double grief to me," he
                    exclaimed, "that I should perish by an arrow feathered from my
                    own wings."


                    The Sick Kite

                    A KITE, sick unto death, said to his mother:  "O Mother! do not
                    mourn, but at once invoke the gods that my life may be
                    prolonged."  She replied, "Alas! my son, which of the gods do you
                    think will pity you? Is there one whom you have not outraged by
                    filching from their very altars a part of the sacrifice offered
                    up to them?'

                    We must make friends in prosperity if we would have their help in
                    adversity.


                    The Lion and the Dolphin

                    A LION roaming by the seashore saw a Dolphin lift up its head out
                    of the waves, and suggested that they contract an alliance,
                    saying that of all the animals they ought to be the best friends,
                    since the one was the king of beasts on the earth, and the other
                    was the sovereign ruler of all the inhabitants of the ocean.  The
                    Dolphin gladly consented to this request.  Not long afterwards
                    the Lion had a combat with a wild bull, and called on the Dolphin
                    to help him.  The Dolphin, though quite willing to give him
                    assistance, was unable to do so, as he could not by any means
                    reach the land.  The Lion abused him as a traitor.  The Dolphin
                    replied, "Nay, my friend, blame not me, but Nature, which, while
                    giving me the sovereignty of the sea, has quite denied me the
                    power of living upon the land."


                    The Lion and the Boar

                    ON A SUMMER DAY, when the great heat induced a general thirst
                    among the beasts, a Lion and a Boar came at the same moment to a
                    small well to drink.  They fiercely disputed which of them should
                    drink first, and were soon engaged in the agonies of a mortal
                    combat.  When they stopped suddenly to catch their breath for a
                    fiercer renewal of the fight, they saw some Vultures waiting in
                    the distance to feast on the one that should fall first.  They at
                    once made up their quarrel, saying, "It is better for us to make
                    friends, than to become the food of Crows or Vultures."


                    The One-Eyed Doe

                    A DOE blind in one eye was accustomed to graze as near to the
                    edge of the cliff as she possibly could, in the hope of securing
                    her greater safety.  She turned her sound eye towards the land
                    that she might get the earliest tidings of the approach of hunter
                    or hound, and her injured eye towards the sea, from whence she
                    entertained no anticipation of danger.  Some boatmen sailing by
                    saw her, and taking a successful aim, mortally wounded her.
                    Yielding up her last breath, she gasped forth this lament:  "O
                    wretched creature that I am! to take such precaution against the
                    land, and after all to find this seashore, to which I had come
                    for safety, so much more perilous."


                    The Shepherd and the Sea

                    A SHEPHERD, keeping watch over his sheep near the shore, saw the
                    Sea very calm and smooth, and longed to make a voyage with a view
                    to commerce.  He sold all his flock, invested it in a cargo of
                    dates, and set sail.  But a very great tempest came on, and the
                    ship being in danger of sinking, he threw all his merchandise
                    overboard, and barely escaped with his life in the empty ship.
                    Not long afterwards when someone passed by and observed the
                    unruffled calm of the Sea, he interrupted him and said, "It is
                    again in want of dates, and therefore looks quiet."


                    The, the Cock, and the Lion

                    AN and a Cock were in a straw-yard together when a Lion,
                    desperate from hunger, approached the spot.  He was about to
                    spring upon the, when the Cock (to the sound of whose voice
                    the Lion, it is said, has a singular aversion) crowed loudly, and
                    the Lion fled away as fast as he could.  The, observing his
                    trepidation at the mere crowing of a Cock summoned courage to
                    attack him, and galloped after him for that purpose.  He had run
                    no long distance, when the Lion, turning about, seized him and
                    tore him to pieces.

                    False confidence often leads into danger.


                    The Mice and the Weasels

                    THE WEASELS and the Mice waged a perpetual war with each other,
                    in which much blood was shed.  The Weasels were always the
                    victors.  The Mice thought that the cause of their frequent
                    defeats was that they had no leaders set apart from the general
                    army to command them, and that they were exposed to dangers from
                    lack of discipline.  They therefore chose as leaders Mice that
                    were most renowned for their family descent, strength, and
                    counsel, as well as those most noted for their courage in the
                    fight, so that they might be better marshaled in battle array and
                    formed into troops, regiments, and battalions.  When all this was
                    done, and the army disciplined, and the herald Mouse had duly
                    proclaimed war by challenging the Weasels, the newly chosen
                    generals bound their heads with straws, that they might be more
                    conspicuous to all their troops.  Scarcely had the battle begun,
                    when a great rout overwhelmed the Mice, who scampered off as fast
                    as they could to their holes.  The generals, not being able to
                    get in on account of the ornaments on their heads, were all
                    captured and eaten by the Weasels.

                    The more honor the more danger.


                    The Mice in Council

                    THE MICE summoned a council to decide how they might best devise
                    means of warning themselves of the approach of their great enemy
                    the Cat.  Among the many plans suggested, the one that found most
                    favor was the proposal to tie a bell to the neck of the Cat, so
                    that the Mice, being warned by the sound of the tinkling, might
                    run away and hide themselves in their holes at his approach.  But
                    when the Mice further debated who among them should thus "bell
                    the Cat," there was no one found to do it.


                    The Wolf and the Housedog

                    A WOLF, meeting a big well-fed Mastiff with a wooden collar about
                    his neck asked him who it was that fed him so well and yet
                    compelled him to drag that heavy log about wherever he went.
                    "The master," he replied.  Then said the Wolf:  "May no friend of
                    mine ever be in such a plight; for the weight of this chain is
                    enough to spoil the appetite."


                    The Rivers and the Sea

                    THE RIVERS joined together to complain to the Sea, saying, "Why
                    is it that when we flow into your tides so potable and sweet, you
                    work in us such a change, and make us salty and unfit to drink?"
                    The Sea, perceiving that they intended to throw the blame on him,
                    said, "Pray cease to flow into me, and then you will not be made
                    briny."


                    The Playful

                    AN climbed up to the roof of a building, and frisking about
                    there, broke in the tiling.  The owner went up after him and
                    quickly drove him down, beating him severely with a thick wooden
                    cudgel.  The said, "Why, I saw the Monkey do this very thing
                    yesterday, and you all laughed heartily, as if it afforded you
                    very great amusement."


                    The Three Tradesmen

                    A GREAT CITY was besieged, and its inhabitants were called
                    together to consider the best means of protecting it from the
                    enemy.  A Bricklayer earnestly recommended bricks as affording
                    the best material for an effective resistance.  A Carpenter, with
                    equal enthusiasm, proposed timber as a preferable method of
                    defense.  Upon which a Currier stood up and said, "Sirs, I differ
                    from you altogether:  there is no material for resistance equal to
                    a covering of hides; and nothing so good as leather."

                    Every man for himself.


                    The Master and His Dogs

                    A CERTAIN MAN, detained by a storm in his country house, first of
                    all killed his sheep, and then his goats, for the maintenance of
                    his household.  The storm still continuing, he was obliged to
                    slaughter his yoke oxen for food.  On seeing this, his Dogs took
                    counsel together, and said, "It is time for us to be off, for if
                    the master spare not his oxen, who work for his gain, how can we
                    expect him to spare us?'

                    He is not to be trusted as a friend who mistreats his own family.


                    The Wolf and the Shepherds

                    A WOLF, passing by, saw some Shepherds in a hut eating a haunch
                    of mutton for their dinner.  Approaching them, he said, "What a
                    clamor you would raise if I were to do as you are doing!"


                    The Dolphins, the Whales, and the Sprat

                    THE DOLPHINS and Whales waged a fierce war with each other.  When
                    the battle was at its height, a Sprat lifted its head out of the
                    waves and said that he would reconcile their differences if they
                    would accept him as an umpire.  One of the Dolphins replied, "We
                    would far rather be destroyed in our battle with each other than
                    admit any interference from you in our affairs."


                    The Carrying the Image

                    AN once carried through the streets of a city a famous wooden
                    Image, to be placed in one of its Temples.  As he passed along,
                    the crowd made lowly prostration before the Image.  The,
                    thinking that they bowed their heads in token of respect for
                    himself, bristled up with pride, gave himself airs, and refused
                    to move another step.  The driver, seeing him thus stop, laid his
                    whip lustily about his shoulders and said, "O you perverse
                    dull-head! it is not yet come to this, that men pay worship to an."

                    They are not wise who give to themselves the credit due to
                    others.


                    The Two Travelers and the Axe

                    TWO MEN were journeying together.  One of them picked up an axe
                    that lay upon the path, and said, "I have found an axe."  "Nay, my
                    friend," replied the other, "do not say 'I,' but 'We' have found
                    an axe."  They had not gone far before they saw the owner of the
                    axe pursuing them, and he who had picked up the axe said, "We are
                    undone."  "Nay," replied the other, "keep to your first mode of
                    speech, my friend; what you thought right then, think right now.
                    Say 'I,' not 'We' are undone."

                    He who shares the danger ought to share the prize.


                    The Old Lion

                    A LION, worn out with years and powerless from disease, lay on
                    the ground at the point of death.  A Boar rushed upon him, and
                    avenged with a stroke of his tusks a long-remembered injury.
                    Shortly afterwards the Bull with his horns gored him as if he
                    were an enemy.  When the saw that the huge beast could be
                    assailed with impunity, he let drive at his forehead with his
                    heels.  The expiring Lion said, "I have reluctantly brooked the
                    insults of the brave, but to be compelled to endure such
                    treatment from thee, a disgrace to Nature, is indeed to die a
                    double death."


                    The Old Hound

                    A HOUND, who in the days of his youth and strength had never
                    yielded to any beast of the forest, encountered in his old age a
                    boar in the chase.  He seized him boldly by the ear, but could
                    not retain his hold because of the decay of his teeth, so that
                    the boar escaped.  His master, quickly coming up, was very much
                    disappointed, and fiercely abused the dog.  The Hound looked up
                    and said, "It was not my fault.  master:  my spirit was as good as
                    ever, but I could not help my infirmities.  I rather deserve to
                    be praised for what I have been, than to be blamed for what I
                    am."


                    The Bee and Jupiter

                    A BEE from Mount Hymettus, the queen of the hive, ascended to
                    Olympus to present Jupiter some honey fresh from her combs.
                    Jupiter, delighted with the offering of honey, promised to give
                    whatever she should ask.  She therefore besought him, saying,
                    "Give me, I pray thee, a sting, that if any mortal shall approach
                    to take my honey, I may kill him."  Jupiter was much displeased,
                    for he loved the race of man, but could not refuse the request
                    because of his promise.  He thus answered the Bee:  "You shall
                    have your request, but it will be at the peril of your own life.
                    For if you use your sting, it shall remain in the wound you make,
                    and then you will die from the loss of it."

                    Evil wishes, like chickens, come home to roost.


                    The Milk-Woman and Her Pail

                    A FARMER'S daughter was carrying her Pail of milk from the field
                    to the farmhouse, when she fell a-musing.  "The money for which
                    this milk will be sold, will buy at least three hundred eggs.
                    The eggs, allowing for all mishaps, will produce two hundred and
                    fifty chickens.  The chickens will become ready for the market
                    when poultry will fetch the highest price, so that by the end of
                    the year I shall have money enough from my share to buy a new
                    gown.  In this dress I will go to the Christmas parties, where
                    all the young fellows will propose to me, but I will toss my head
                    and refuse them every one."  At this moment she tossed her head in
                    unison with her thoughts, when down fell the milk pail to the
                    ground, and all her imaginary schemes perished in a moment.


                    The Seaside Travelers

                    SOME TRAVELERS, journeying along the seashore, climbed to the
                    summit of a tall cliff, and looking over the sea, saw in the
                    distance what they thought was a large ship.  They waited in the
                    hope of seeing it enter the harbor, but as the object on which
                    they looked was driven nearer to shore by the wind, they found
                    that it could at the most be a small boat, and not a ship.  When
                    however it reached the beach, they discovered that it was only a
                    large faggot of sticks, and one of them said to his companions,
                    "We have waited for no purpose, for after all there is nothing to
                    see but a load of wood."

                    Our mere anticipations of life outrun its realities.


                    The Brazier and His Dog

                    A BRAZIER had a little Dog, which was a great favorite with his
                    master, and his constant companion.  While he hammered away at
                    his metals the Dog slept; but when, on the other hand, he went to
                    dinner and began to eat, the Dog woke up and wagged his tail, as
                    if he would ask for a share of his meal.  His master one day,
                    pretending to be angry and shaking his stick at him, said, "You
                    wretched little sluggard! what shall I do to you? While I am
                    hammering on the anvil, you sleep on the mat; and when I begin to
                    eat after my toil, you wake up and wag your tail for food.  Do
                    you not know that labor is the source of every blessing, and that
                    none but those who work are entitled to eat?'


                    The and His Shadow

                    A TRAVELER hired an to convey him to a distant place.  The
                    day being intensely hot, and the sun shining in its strength, the
                    Traveler stopped to rest, and sought shelter from the heat under
                    the Shadow of the.  As this afforded only protection for one,
                    and as the Traveler and the owner of the both claimed it, a
                    violent dispute arose between them as to which of them had the
                    right to the Shadow.  The owner maintained that he had let the
                    only, and not his Shadow.  The Traveler asserted that he had,
                    with the hire of the, hired his Shadow also.  The quarrel
                    proceeded from words to blows, and while the men fought, the galloped off.

                    In quarreling about the shadow we often lose the substance.


                    The and His Masters

                    AN, belonging to an herb-seller who gave him too little food
                    and too much work made a petition to Jupiter to be released from
                    his present service and provided with another master.  Jupiter,
                    after warning him that he would repent his request, caused him to
                    be sold to a tile-maker.  Shortly afterwards, finding that he had
                    heavier loads to carry and harder work in the brick-field, he
                    petitioned for another change of master.  Jupiter, telling him
                    that it would be the last time that he could grant his request,
                    ordained that he be sold to a tanner.  The found that he had
                    fallen into worse hands, and noting his master's occupation,
                    said, groaning:  "It would have been better for me to have been
                    either starved by the one, or to have been overworked by the
                    other of my former masters, than to have been bought by my
                    present owner, who will even after I am dead tan my hide, and
                    make me useful to him."


                    The Oak and the Reeds

                    A VERY LARGE OAK was uprooted by the wind and thrown across a
                    stream.  It fell among some Reeds, which it thus addressed:  "I
                    wonder how you, who are so light and weak, are not entirely
                    crushed by these strong winds."  They replied, "You fight and
                    contend with the wind, and consequently you are destroyed; while
                    we on the contrary bend before the least breath of air, and
                    therefore remain unbroken, and escape."

                    Stoop to conquer.


                    The Fisherman and the Little Fish

                    A FISHERMAN who lived on the produce of his nets, one day caught
                    a single small Fish as the result of his day's labor.  The Fish,
                    panting convulsively, thus entreated for his life:  "O Sir, what
                    good can I be to you, and how little am I worth? I am not yet
                    come to my full size.  Pray spare my life, and put me back into
                    the sea.  I shall soon become a large fish fit for the tables of
                    the rich, and then you can catch me again, and make a handsome
                    profit of me."  The Fisherman replied, "I should indeed be a very
                    simple fellow if, for the chance of a greater uncertain profit, I
                    were to forego my present certain gain."


                    The Hunter and the Woodman

                    A HUNTER, not very bold, was searching for the tracks of a Lion.
                    He asked a man felling oaks in the forest if he had seen any
                    marks of his footsteps or knew where his lair was.  "I will,"
                    said the man, "at once show you the Lion himself."  The Hunter,
                    turning very pale and chattering with his teeth from fear,
                    replied, "No, thank you.  I did not ask that; it is his track
                    only I am in search of, not the Lion himself."

                    The hero is brave in deeds as well as words.


                    The Wild Boar and the Fox

                    A WILD BOAR stood under a tree and rubbed his tusks against the
                    trunk.  A Fox passing by asked him why he thus sharpened his
                    teeth when there was no danger threatening from either huntsman
                    or hound.  He replied, "I do it advisedly; for it would never do
                    to have to sharpen my weapons just at the time I ought to be
                    using them."


                    The Lion in a Farmyard

                    A LION entered a farmyard.  The Farmer, wishing to catch him,
                    shut the gate.  When the Lion found that he could not escape, he
                    flew upon the sheep and killed them, and then attacked the oxen.
                    The Farmer, beginning to be alarmed for his own safety, opened
                    the gate and released the Lion.  On his departure the Farmer
                    grievously lamented the destruction of his sheep and oxen, but
                    his wife, who had been a spectator to all that took place, said,
                    "On my word, you are rightly served, for how could you for a
                    moment think of shutting up a Lion along with you in your
                    farmyard when you know that you shake in your shoes if you only
                    hear his roar at a distance?'


                    Mercury and the Sculptor

                    MERCURY ONCE DETERMINED to learn in what esteem he was held among
                    mortals.  For this purpose he assumed the character of a man and
                    visited in this disguise a Sculptor's studio having looked at
                    various statues, he demanded the price of two figures of Jupiter
                    and Juno.  When the sum at which they were valued was named, he
                    pointed to a figure of himself, saying to the Sculptor, "You will
                    certainly want much more for this, as it is the statue of the
                    Messenger of the Gods, and author of all your gain."  The
                    Sculptor replied, "Well, if you will buy these, I'll fling you
                    that into the bargain."


                    The Swan and the Goose

                    A CERTAIN rich man bought in the market a Goose and a Swan.  He
                    fed the one for his table and kept the other for the sake of its
                    song.  When the time came for killing the Goose, the cook went to
                    get him at night, when it was dark, and he was not able to
                    distinguish one bird from the other.  By mistake he caught the
                    Swan instead of the Goose.  The Swan, threatened with death,
                    burst forth into song and thus made himself known by his voice,
                    and preserved his life by his melody.


                    The Swollen Fox

                    A VERY HUNGRY FOX, seeing some bread and meat left by shepherds
                    in the hollow of an oak, crept into the hole and made a hearty
                    meal.  When he finished, he was so full that he was not able to
                    get out, and began to groan and lament his fate.  Another Fox
                    passing by heard his cries, and coming up, inquired the cause of
                    his complaining.  On learning what had happened, he said to him,
                    "Ah, you will have to remain there, my friend, until you become
                    such as you were when you crept in, and then you will easily get
                    out."


                    The Fox and the Woodcutter

                    A FOX, running before the hounds, came across a Woodcutter
                    felling an oak and begged him to show him a safe hiding-place.
                    The Woodcutter advised him to take shelter in his own hut, so the
                    Fox crept in and hid himself in a corner.  The huntsman soon came
                    up with his hounds and inquired of the Woodcutter if he had seen
                    the Fox.  He declared that he had not seen him, and yet pointed,
                    all the time he was speaking, to the hut where the Fox lay
                    hidden.  The huntsman took no notice of the signs, but believing
                    his word, hastened forward in the chase.  As soon as they were
                    well away, the Fox departed without taking any notice of the
                    Woodcutter:  whereon he called to him and reproached him, saying,
                    "You ungrateful fellow, you owe your life to me, and yet you
                    leave me without a word of thanks."  The Fox replied, "Indeed, I
                    should have thanked you fervently if your deeds had been as good
                    as your words, and if your hands had not been traitors to your
                    speech."


                    The Birdcatcher, the Partridge, and the Cock

                    A BIRDCATCHER was about to sit down to a dinner of herbs when a
                    friend unexpectedly came in.  The bird-trap was quite empty, as
                    he had caught nothing, and he had to kill a pied Partridge, which
                    he had tamed for a decoy.  The bird entreated earnestly for his
                    life:  "What would you do without me when next you spread your
                    nets? Who would chirp you to sleep, or call for you the covey of
                    answering birds?'  The Birdcatcher spared his life, and determined
                    to pick out a fine young Cock just attaining to his comb.  But
                    the Cock expostulated in piteous tones from his perch:  "If you
                    kill me, who will announce to you the appearance of the dawn?
                    Who will wake you to your daily tasks or tell you when it is time
                    to visit the bird-trap in the morning?'  He replied, "What you say
                    is true.  You are a capital bird at telling the time of day.  But
                    my friend and I must have our dinners."

                    Necessity knows no law.


                    The Monkey and the Fishermen

                    A MONKEY perched upon a lofty tree saw some Fishermen casting
                    their nets into a river, and narrowly watched their proceedings.
                    The Fishermen after a while gave up fishing, and on going home to
                    dinner left their nets upon the bank.  The Monkey, who is the
                    most imitative of animals, descended from the treetop and
                    endeavored to do as they had done.  Having handled the net, he
                    threw it into the river, but became tangled in the meshes and
                    drowned.  With his last breath he said to himself, "I am rightly
                    served; for what business had I who had never handled a net to
                    try and catch fish?'


                    The Flea and the Wrestler

                    A FLEA settled upon the bare foot of a Wrestler and bit him,
                    causing the man to call loudly upon Hercules for help.  When the
                    Flea a second time hopped upon his foot, he groaned and said, "O
                    Hercules! if you will not help me against a Flea, how can I hope
                    for your assistance against greater antagonists?'


                    The Two Frogs

                    TWO FROGS dwelt in the same pool.  When the pool dried up under
                    the summer's heat, they left it and set out together for another
                    home.  As they went along they chanced to pass a deep well, amply
                    supplied with water, and when they saw it, one of the Frogs said
                    to the other, "Let us descend and make our abode in this well:  it
                    will furnish us with shelter and food."  The other replied with
                    greater caution, "But suppose the water should fail us.  How can
                    we get out again from so great a depth?'

                    Do nothing without a regard to the consequences.


                    The Cat and the Mice

                    A CERTAIN HOUSE was overrun with Mice.  A Cat, discovering this,
                    made her way into it and began to catch and eat them one by one.
                    Fearing for their lives, the Mice kept themselves close in their
                    holes.  The Cat was no longer able to get at them and perceived
                    that she must tempt them forth by some device.  For this purpose
                    she jumped upon a peg, and suspending herself from it, pretended
                    to be dead.  One of the Mice, peeping stealthily out, saw her and
                    said, "Ah, my good madam, even though you should turn into a
                    meal-bag, we will not come near you."


                    The Lion, the Bear, and the Fox

                    A LION and a Bear seized a Kid at the same moment, and fought
                    fiercely for its possession.  When they had fearfully lacerated
                    each other and were faint from the long combat, they lay down
                    exhausted with fatigue.  A Fox, who had gone round them at a
                    distance several times, saw them both stretched on the ground
                    with the Kid lying untouched in the middle.  He ran in between
                    them, and seizing the Kid scampered off as fast as he could.  The
                    Lion and the Bear saw him, but not being able to get up, said,
                    "Woe be to us, that we should have fought and belabored ourselves
                    only to serve the turn of a Fox."

                    It sometimes happens that one man has all the toil, and another
                    all the profit.


                    The Doe and the Lion

                    A DOE hard pressed by hunters sought refuge in a cave belonging
                    to a Lion.  The Lion concealed himself on seeing her approach,
                    but when she was safe within the cave, sprang upon her and tore
                    her to pieces.  "Woe is me," exclaimed the Doe, "who have escaped
                    from man, only to throw myself into the mouth of a wild beast?'

                    In avoiding one evil, care must be taken not to fall into
                    another.


                    The Farmer and the Fox

                    A FARMER, who bore a grudge against a Fox for robbing his poultry
                    yard, caught him at last, and being determined to take an ample
                    revenge, tied some rope well soaked in oil to his tail, and set
                    it on fire.  The Fox by a strange fatality rushed to the fields
                    of the Farmer who had captured him.  It was the time of the wheat
                    harvest; but the Farmer reaped nothing that year and returned
                    home grieving sorely.


                    The Seagull and the Kite

                    A SEAGULL having bolted down too large a fish, burst its deep
                    gullet-bag and lay down on the shore to die.  A Kite saw him and
                    exclaimed:  "You richly deserve your fate; for a bird of the air
                    has no business to seek its food from the sea."

                    Every man should be content to mind his own business.


                    The Philosopher, the Ants, and Mercury

                    A PHILOSOPHER witnessed from the shore the shipwreck of a vessel,
                    of which the crew and passengers were all drowned.  He inveighed
                    against the injustice of Providence, which would for the sake of
                    one criminal perchance sailing in the ship allow so many innocent
                    persons to perish.  As he was indulging in these reflections, he
                    found himself surrounded by a whole army of Ants, near whose nest
                    he was standing.  One of them climbed up and stung him, and he
                    immediately trampled them all to death with his foot.  Mercury
                    presented himself, and striking the Philosopher with his wand,
                    said, "And are you indeed to make yourself a judge of the
                    dealings of Providence, who hast thyself in a similar manner
                    treated these poor Ants?'


                    The Mouse and the Bull

                    A BULL was bitten by a Mouse and, angered by the wound, tried to
                    capture him.  But the Mouse reached his hole in safety.  Though
                    the Bull dug into the walls with his horns, he tired before he
                    could rout out the Mouse, and crouching down, went to sleep
                    outside the hole.  The Mouse peeped out, crept furtively up his
                    flank, and again biting him, retreated to his hole.  The Bull
                    rising up, and not knowing what to do, was sadly perplexed.  At
                    which the Mouse said, "The great do not always prevail.  There
                    are times when the small and lowly are the strongest to do
                    mischief."


                    The Lion and the Hare

                    A LION came across a Hare, who was fast asleep.  He was just in
                    the act of seizing her, when a fine young Hart trotted by, and he
                    left the Hare to follow him.  The Hare, scared by the noise,
                    awoke and scudded away.  The Lion was unable after a long chase
                    to catch the Hart, and returned to feed upon the Hare.  On
                    finding that the Hare also had run off, he said, "I am rightly
                    served, for having let go of the food that I had in my hand for
                    the chance of obtaining more."


                    The Peasant and the Eagle

                    A PEASANT found an Eagle captured in a trap, and much admiring
                    the bird, set him free.  The Eagle did not prove ungrateful to
                    his deliverer, for seeing the Peasant sitting under a wall which
                    was not safe, he flew toward him and with his talons snatched a
                    bundle from his head.  When the Peasant rose in pursuit, the
                    Eagle let the bundle fall again.  Taking it up, the man returned
                    to the same place, to find that the wall under which he had been
                    sitting had fallen to pieces; and he marveled at the service
                    rendered him by the Eagle.


                    The Image of Mercury and the Carpenter

                    A VERY POOR MAN, a Carpenter by trade, had a wooden image of
                    Mercury, before which he made offerings day by day, and begged
                    the idol to make him rich, but in spite of his entreaties he
                    became poorer and poorer.  At last, being very angry, he took his
                    image down from its pedestal and dashed it against the wall.
                    When its head was knocked off, out came a stream of gold, which
                    the Carpenter quickly picked up and said, "Well, I think thou art
                    altogether contradictory and unreasonable; for when I paid you
                    honor, I reaped no benefits:  but now that I maltreat you I am
                    loaded with an abundance of riches."


                    The Bull and the Goat

                    A BULL, escaping from a Lion, hid in a cave which some shepherds
                    had recently occupied.  As soon as he entered, a He-Goat left in
                    the cave sharply attacked him with his horns.  The Bull quietly
                    addressed him:  "Butt away as much as you will.  I have no fear of
                    you, but of the Lion.  Let that monster go away and I will soon
                    let you know what is the respective strength of a Goat and a
                    Bull."

                    It shows an evil disposition to take advantage of a friend in
                    distress.


                    The Dancing Monkeys

                    A PRINCE had some Monkeys trained to dance.  Being naturally
                    great mimics of men's actions, they showed themselves most apt
                    pupils, and when arrayed in their rich clothes and masks, they
                    danced as well as any of the courtiers.  The spectacle was often
                    repeated with great applause, till on one occasion a courtier,
                    bent on mischief, took from his pocket a handful of nuts and
                    threw them upon the stage.  The Monkeys at the sight of the nuts
                    forgot their dancing and became (as indeed they were) Monkeys
                    instead of actors.  Pulling off their masks and tearing their
                    robes, they fought with one another for the nuts.  The dancing
                    spectacle thus came to an end amidst the laughter and ridicule of
                    the audience.

                    The Fox and the Leopard

                    THE FOX and the Leopard disputed which was the more beautiful of
                    the two.  The Leopard exhibited one by one the various spots
                    which decorated his skin.  But the Fox, interrupting him, said,
                    "And how much more beautiful than you am I, who am decorated, not
                    in body, but in mind."


                    The Monkeys and Their Mother

                    THE MONKEY, it is said, has two young ones at each birth.  The
                    Mother fondles one and nurtures it with the greatest affection
                    and care, but hates and neglects the other.  It happened once
                    that the young one which was caressed and loved was smothered by
                    the too great affection of the Mother, while the despised one was
                    nurtured and reared in spite of the neglect to which it was
                    exposed.

                    The best intentions will not always ensure success.


                    The Oaks and Jupiter

                    THE OAKS presented a complaint to Jupiter, saying, "We bear for
                    no purpose the burden of life, as of all the trees that grow we
                    are the most continually in peril of the axe."  Jupiter made
                    answer:  "You have only to thank yourselves for the misfortunes to
                    which you are exposed:  for if you did not make such excellent
                    pillars and posts, and prove yourselves so serviceable to the
                    carpenters and the farmers, the axe would not so frequently be
                    laid to your roots."


                    The Hare and the Hound

                    A HOUND started a Hare from his lair, but after a long run, gave
                    up the chase.  A goat-herd seeing him stop, mocked him, saying
                    "The little one is the best runner of the two."  The Hound
                    replied, "You do not see the difference between us:  I was only
                    running for a dinner, but he for his life."


                    The Traveler and Fortune

                    A TRAVELER wearied from a long journey lay down, overcome with
                    fatigue, on the very brink of a deep well.  Just as he was about
                    to fall into the water, Dame Fortune, it is said, appeared to him
                    and waking him from his slumber thus addressed him:  "Good Sir,
                    pray wake up:  for if you fall into the well, the blame will be
                    thrown on me, and I shall get an ill name among mortals; for I
                    find that men are sure to impute their calamities to me, however
                    much by their own folly they have really brought them on
                    themselves."

                    Everyone is more or less master of his own fate.


                    The Bald Knight

                    A BALD KNIGHT, who wore a wig, went out to hunt.  A sudden puff
                    of wind blew off his hat and wig, at which a loud laugh rang
                    forth from his companions.  He pulled up his horse, and with
                    great glee joined in the joke by saying, "What a marvel it is
                    that hairs which are not mine should fly from me, when they have
                    forsaken even the man on whose head they grew."


                    The Shepherd and the Dog

                    A SHEPHERD penning his sheep in the fold for the night was about
                    to shut up a wolf with them, when his Dog perceiving the wolf
                    said, "Master, how can you expect the sheep to be safe if you
                    admit a wolf into the fold?'


                    The Lamp

                    A LAMP, soaked with too much oil and flaring brightly, boasted
                    that it gave more light than the sun.  Then a sudden puff of wind
                    arose, and the Lamp was immediately extinguished.  Its owner lit
                    it again, and said:  "Boast no more, but henceforth be content to
                    give thy light in silence.  Know that not even the stars need to
                    be relit"


                    The Lion, the Fox, and the

                    THE LION, the Fox and the entered into an agreement to assist
                    each other in the chase.  Having secured a large booty, the Lion
                    on their return from the forest asked the to allot his due
                    portion to each of the three partners in the treaty.  The carefully divided the spoil into three equal shares and modestly
                    requested the two others to make the first choice.  The Lion,
                    bursting out into a great rage, devoured the.  Then he
                    requested the Fox to do him the favor to make a division.  The
                    Fox accumulated all that they had killed into one large heap and
                    left to himself the smallest possible morsel.  The Lion said,
                    "Who has taught you, my very excellent fellow, the art of
                    division? You are perfect to a fraction."  He replied, "I learned
                    it from the, by witnessing his fate."

                    Happy is the man who learns from the misfortunes of others.


                    The Bull, the Lioness, and the Wild-Boar Hunter

                    A BULL finding a lion's cub asleep gored him to death with his
                    horns.  The Lioness came up, and bitterly lamented the death of
                    her whelp.  A wild-boar Hunter, seeing her distress, stood at a
                    distance and said to her, "Think how many men there are who have
                    reason to lament the loss of their children, whose deaths have
                    been caused by you."


                    The Oak and the Woodcutters

                    THE WOODCUTTER cut down a Mountain Oak and split it in pieces,
                    making wedges of its own branches for dividing the trunk.  The
                    Oak said with a sigh, "I do not care about the blows of the axe
                    aimed at my roots, but I do grieve at being torn in pieces by
                    these wedges made from my own branches."

                    Misfortunes springing from ourselves are the hardest to bear.


                    The Hen and the Golden Eggs

                    A COTTAGER and his wife had a Hen that laid a golden egg every
                    day.  They supposed that the Hen must contain a great lump of
                    gold in its inside, and in order to get the gold they killed it.
                    Having done so, they found to their surprise that the Hen
                    differed in no respect from their other hens.  The foolish pair,
                    thus hoping to become rich all at once, deprived themselves of
                    the gain of which they were assured day by day.


                    The and the Frogs

                    AN, carrying a load of wood, passed through a pond.  As he
                    was crossing through the water he lost his footing, stumbled and
                    fell, and not being able to rise on account of his load, groaned
                    heavily.  Some Frogs frequenting the pool heard his lamentation,
                    and said, "What would you do if you had to live here always as we
                    do, when you make such a fuss about a mere fall into the water?"


                    Men often bear little grievances with less courage than they do
                    large misfortunes.


                    The Crow and the Raven

                    A CROW was jealous of the Raven, because he was considered a bird
                    of good omen and always attracted the attention of men, who noted
                    by his flight the good or evil course of future events.  Seeing
                    some travelers approaching, the Crow flew up into a tree, and
                    perching herself on one of the branches, cawed as loudly as she
                    could.  The travelers turned towards the sound and wondered what
                    it foreboded, when one of them said to his companion, "Let us
                    proceed on our journey, my friend, for it is only the caw of a
                    crow, and her cry, you know, is no omen."

                    Those who assume a character which does not belong to them, only
                    make themselves ridiculous.


                    The Trees and the Axe

                    A MAN came into a forest and asked the Trees to provide him a
                    handle for his axe.  The Trees consented to his request and gave
                    him a young ash-tree.  No sooner had the man fitted a new handle
                    to his axe from it, than he began to use it and quickly felled
                    with his strokes the noblest giants of the forest.  An old oak,
                    lamenting when too late the destruction of his companions, said
                    to a neighboring cedar, "The first step has lost us all.  If we
                    had not given up the rights of the ash, we might yet have
                    retained our own privileges and have stood for ages."


                    The Crab and the Fox

                    A CRAB, forsaking the seashore, chose a neighboring green meadow
                    as its feeding ground.  A Fox came across him, and being very
                    hungry ate him up.  Just as he was on the point of being eaten,
                    the Crab said, "I well deserve my fate, for what business had I
                    on the land, when by my nature and habits I am only adapted for
                    the sea?'

                    Contentment with our lot is an element of happiness.


                    The Woman and Her Hen

                    A WOMAN possessed a Hen that gave her an egg every day.  She
                    often pondered how she might obtain two eggs daily instead of
                    one, and at last, to gain her purpose, determined to give the Hen
                    a double allowance of barley.  From that day the Hen became fat
                    and sleek, and never once laid another egg.


                    The and the Old Shepherd

                    A SHEPHERD, watching his feeding in a meadow, was alarmed all
                    of a sudden by the cries of the enemy.  He appealed to the to
                    fly with him, lest they should both be captured, but the animal
                    lazily replied, "Why should I, pray? Do you think it likely the
                    conqueror will place on me two sets of panniers?'  "No," rejoined
                    the Shepherd.  "Then," said the, "as long as I carry the
                    panniers, what matters it to me whom I serve?'

                    In a change of government the poor change nothing beyond the name
                    of their master.


                    The Kites and the Swans

                    TEE KITES of olden times, as well as the Swans, had the privilege
                    of song.  But having heard the neigh of the horse, they were so
                    enchanted with the sound, that they tried to imitate it; and, in
                    trying to neigh, they forgot how to sing.

                    The desire for imaginary benefits often involves the loss of
                    present blessings.


                    The Wolves and the Sheepdogs

                    THE WOLVES thus addressed the Sheepdogs:  "Why should you, who are
                    like us in so many things, not be entirely of one mind with us,
                    and live with us as brothers should? We differ from you in one
                    point only.  We live in freedom, but you bow down to and slave
                    for men, who in return for your services flog you with whips and
                    put collars on your necks.  They make you also guard their sheep,
                    and while they eat the mutton throw only the bones to you.  If
                    you will be persuaded by us, you will give us the sheep, and we
                    will enjoy them in common, till we all are surfeited."  The Dogs
                    listened favorably to these proposals, and, entering the den of
                    the Wolves, they were set upon and torn to pieces.


                    The Hares and the Foxes

                    THE HARES waged war with the Eagles, and called upon the Foxes to
                    help them.  They replied, "We would willingly have helped you, if
                    we had not known who you were, and with whom you were fighting."

                    Count the cost before you commit yourselves.


                    The Bowman and Lion

                    A VERY SKILLFUL BOWMAN went to the mountains in search of game,
                    but all the beasts of the forest fled at his approach.  The Lion
                    alone challenged him to combat.  The Bowman immediately shot out
                    an arrow and said to the Lion:  "I send thee my messenger, that
                    from him thou mayest learn what I myself shall be when I assail
                    thee."  The wounded Lion rushed away in great fear, and when a Fox
                    who had seen it all happen told him to be of good courage and not
                    to back off at the first attack he replied:  "You counsel me in
                    vain; for if he sends so fearful a messenger, how shall I abide
                    the attack of the man himself?'

                    Be on guard against men who can strike from a distance.


                    The Camel

                    WHEN MAN first saw the Camel, he was so frightened at his vast
                    size that he ran away.  After a time, perceiving the meekness and
                    gentleness of the beast's temper, he summoned courage enough to
                    approach him.  Soon afterwards, observing that he was an animal
                    altogether deficient in spirit, he assumed such boldness as to
                    put a bridle in his mouth, and to let a child drive him.

                    Use serves to overcome dread.


                    The Wasp and the Snake

                    A WASP seated himself upon the head of a Snake and, striking him
                    unceasingly with his stings, wounded him to death.  The Snake,
                    being in great torment and not knowing how to rid himself of his
                    enemy, saw a wagon heavily laden with wood, and went and
                    purposely placed his head under the wheels, saying, "At least my
                    enemy and I shall perish together."


                    The Dog and the Hare

                    A HOUND having started a Hare on the hillside pursued her for
                    some distance, at one time biting her with his teeth as if he
                    would take her life, and at another fawning upon her, as if in
                    play with another dog.  The Hare said to him, "I wish you would
                    act sincerely by me, and show yourself in your true colors.  If
                    you are a friend, why do you bite me so hard? If an enemy, why do
                    you fawn on me?'

                    No one can be a friend if you know not whether to trust or
                    distrust him.


                    The Bull and the Calf

                    A BULL was striving with all his might to squeeze himself through
                    a narrow passage which led to his stall.  A young Calf came up,
                    and offered to go before and show him the way by which he could
                    manage to pass.  "Save yourself the trouble," said the Bull; "I
                    knew that way long before you were born."


                    The Stag, the Wolf, and the Sheep

                    A STAG asked a Sheep to lend him a measure of wheat, and said
                    that the Wolf would be his surety.  The Sheep, fearing some fraud
                    was intended, excused herself, saying, "The Wolf is accustomed to
                    seize what he wants and to run off; and you, too, can quickly
                    outstrip me in your rapid flight.  How then shall I be able to
                    find you, when the day of payment comes?'

                    Two blacks do not make one white.


                    The Peacock and the Crane

                    A PEACOCK spreading its gorgeous tail mocked a Crane that passed
                    by, ridiculing the ashen hue of its plumage and saying, "I am
                    robed, like a king, in gold and purple and all the colors of the
                    rainbow; while you have not a bit of color on your wings."
                    "True," replied the Crane; "but I soar to the heights of heaven
                    and lift up my voice to the stars, while you walk below, like a
                    cock, among the birds of the dunghill."

                    Fine feathers don't make fine birds.


                    The Fox and the Hedgehog

                    A FOX swimming across a rapid river was carried by the force of
                    the current into a very deep ravine, where he lay for a long time
                    very much bruised, sick, and unable to move.  A swarm of hungry
                    blood-sucking flies settled upon him.  A Hedgehog, passing by,
                    saw his anguish and inquired if he should drive away the flies
                    that were tormenting him.  "By no means," replied the Fox; "pray
                    do not molest them."  "How is this?'  said the Hedgehog; "do you
                    not want to be rid of them?'  "No," returned the Fox, "for these
                    flies which you see are full of blood, and sting me but little,
                    and if you rid me of these which are already satiated, others
                    more hungry will come in their place, and will drink up all the
                    blood I have left."


                    The Eagle, the Cat, and the Wild Sow

                    AN EAGLE made her nest at the top of a lofty oak; a Cat, having
                    found a convenient hole, moved into the middle of the trunk; and
                    a Wild Sow, with her young, took shelter in a hollow at its foot.
                    The Cat cunningly resolved to destroy this chance-made colony.
                    To carry out her design, she climbed to the nest of the Eagle,
                    and said, "Destruction is preparing for you, and for me too,
                    unfortunately.  The Wild Sow, whom you see daily digging up the
                    earth, wishes to uproot the oak, so she may on its fall seize our
                    families as food for her young."  Having thus frightened the Eagle
                    out of her senses, she crept down to the cave of the Sow, and
                    said, "Your children are in great danger; for as soon as you go
                    out with your litter to find food, the Eagle is prepared to
                    pounce upon one of your little pigs."  Having instilled these
                    fears into the Sow, she went and pretended to hide herself in the
                    hollow of the tree.  When night came she went forth with silent
                    foot and obtained food for herself and her kittens, but feigning
                    to be afraid, she kept a lookout all through the day.  Meanwhile,
                    the Eagle, full of fear of the Sow, sat still on the branches,
                    and the Sow, terrified by the Eagle, did not dare to go out from
                    her cave.  And thus they both, along with their families,
                    perished from hunger, and afforded ample provision for the Cat
                    and her kittens.


                    The Thief and the Innkeeper

                    A THIEF hired a room in a tavern and stayed a while in the hope
                    of stealing something which should enable him to pay his
                    reckoning.  When he had waited some days in vain, he saw the
                    Innkeeper dressed in a new and handsome coat and sitting before
                    his door.  The Thief sat down beside him and talked with him.  As
                    the conversation began to flag, the Thief yawned terribly and at
                    the same time howled like a wolf.  The Innkeeper said, "Why do
                    you howl so fearfully?'  "I will tell you," said the Thief, "but
                    first let me ask you to hold my clothes, or I shall tear them to
                    pieces.  I know not, sir, when I got this habit of yawning, nor
                    whether these attacks of howling were inflicted on me as a
                    judgment for my crimes, or for any other cause; but this I do
                    know, that when I yawn for the third time, I actually turn into a
                    wolf and attack men."  With this speech he commenced a second fit
                    of yawning and again howled like a wolf, as he had at first.  The
                    Innkeeper.  hearing his tale and believing what he said, became
                    greatly alarmed and, rising from his seat, attempted to run away.
                    The Thief laid hold of his coat and entreated him to stop,
                    saying, "Pray wait, sir, and hold my clothes, or I shall tear
                    them to pieces in my fury, when I turn into a wolf."  At the same
                    moment he yawned the third time and set up a terrible howl.  The
                    Innkeeper, frightened lest he should be attacked, left his new
                    coat in the Thief's hand and ran as fast as he could into the inn
                    for safety.  The Thief made off with the coat and did not return
                    again to the inn.

                    Every tale is not to be believed.


                    The Mule

                    A MULE, frolicsome from lack of work and from too much corn,
                    galloped about in a very extravagant manner, and said to himself:
                    "My father surely was a high-mettled racer, and I am his own
                    child in speed and spirit."  On the next day, being driven a long
                    journey, and feeling very wearied, he exclaimed in a disconsolate
                    tone:  "I must have made a mistake; my father, after all, could
                    have been only an."


                    The Hart and the Vine

                    A HART, hard pressed in the chase, hid himself beneath the large
                    leaves of a Vine.  The huntsmen, in their haste, overshot the
                    place of his concealment.  Supposing all danger to have passed,
                    the Hart began to nibble the tendrils of the Vine.  One of the
                    huntsmen, attracted by the rustling of the leaves, looked back,
                    and seeing the Hart, shot an arrow from his bow and struck it.
                    The Hart, at the point of death, groaned:  "I am rightly served,
                    for I should not have maltreated the Vine that saved me."


                    The Serpent and the Eagle

                    A SERPENT and an Eagle were struggling with each other in deadly
                    conflict.  The Serpent had the advantage, and was about to
                    strangle the bird.  A countryman saw them, and running up, loosed
                    the coil of the Serpent and let the Eagle go free.  The Serpent,
                    irritated at the escape of his prey, injected his poison into the
                    drinking horn of the countryman.  The rustic, ignorant of his
                    danger, was about to drink, when the Eagle struck his hand with
                    his wing, and, seizing the drinking horn in his talons, carried
                    it aloft.


                    The Crow and the Pitcher

                    A CROW perishing with thirst saw a pitcher, and hoping to find
                    water, flew to it with delight.  When he reached it, he
                    discovered to his grief that it contained so little water that he
                    could not possibly get at it.  He tried everything he could think
                    of to reach the water, but all his efforts were in vain.  At last
                    he collected as many stones as he could carry and dropped them
                    one by one with his beak into the pitcher, until he brought the
                    water within his reach and thus saved his life.

                    Necessity is the mother of invention.


                    The Two Frogs

                    TWO FROGS were neighbors.  One inhabited a deep pond, far removed
                    from public view; the other lived in a gully containing little
                    water, and traversed by a country road.  The Frog that lived in
                    the pond warned his friend to change his residence and entreated
                    him to come and live with him, saying that he would enjoy greater
                    safety from danger and more abundant food.  The other refused,
                    saying that he felt it so very hard to leave a place to which he
                    had become accustomed.  A few days afterwards a heavy wagon
                    passed through the gully and crushed him to death under its
                    wheels.

                    A willful man will have his way to his own hurt.


                    The Wolf and the Fox

                    AT ONE TIME a very large and strong Wolf was born among the
                    wolves, who exceeded all his fellow-wolves in strength, size, and
                    swiftness, so that they unanimously decided to call him "Lion."
                    The Wolf, with a lack of sense proportioned to his enormous size,
                    thought that they gave him this name in earnest, and, leaving his
                    own race, consorted exclusively with the lions.  An old sly Fox,
                    seeing this, said, "May I never make myself so ridiculous as you
                    do in your pride and self-conceit; for even though you have the
                    size of a lion among wolves, in a herd of lions you are
                    definitely a wolf."


                    The Walnut-Tree

                    A WALNUT TREE standing by the roadside bore an abundant crop of
                    fruit.  For the sake of the nuts, the passers-by broke its
                    branches with stones and sticks.  The Walnut-Tree piteously
                    exclaimed, "O wretched me! that those whom I cheer with my fruit
                    should repay me with these painful requitals!"


                    The Gnat and the Lion

                    A GNAT came and said to a Lion, "I do not in the least fear you,
                    nor are you stronger than I am.  For in what does your strength
                    consist? You can scratch with your claws and bite with your teeth
                    an a woman in her quarrels.  I repeat that I am altogether more
                    powerful than you; and if you doubt it, let us fight and see who
                    will conquer."  The Gnat, having sounded his horn, fastened
                    himself upon the Lion and stung him on the nostrils and the parts
                    of the face devoid of hair.  While trying to crush him, the Lion
                    tore himself with his claws, until he punished himself severely.
                    The Gnat thus prevailed over the Lion, and, buzzing about in a
                    song of triumph, flew away.  But shortly afterwards he became
                    entangled in the meshes of a cobweb and was eaten by a spider.
                    He greatly lamented his fate, saying, "Woe is me! that I, who can
                    wage war successfully with the hugest beasts, should perish
                    myself from this spider, the most inconsiderable of insects!"


                    The Monkey and the Dolphin

                    A SAILOR, bound on a long voyage, took with him a Monkey to amuse
                    him while on shipboard.  As he sailed off the coast of Greece, a
                    violent tempest arose in which the ship was wrecked and he, his
                    Monkey, and all the crew were obliged to swim for their lives.  A
                    Dolphin saw the Monkey contending with the waves, and supposing
                    him to be a man (whom he is always said to befriend), came and
                    placed himself under him, to convey him on his back in safety to
                    the shore.  When the Dolphin arrived with his burden in sight of
                    land not far from Athens, he asked the Monkey if he were an
                    Athenian.  The latter replied that he was, and that he was
                    descended from one of the most noble families in that city.  The
                    Dolphin then inquired if he knew the Piraeus (the famous harbor
                    of Athens).  Supposing that a man was meant, the Monkey answered
                    that he knew him very well and that he was an intimate friend.
                    The Dolphin, indignant at these falsehoods, dipped the Monkey
                    under the water and drowned him.


                    The Jackdaw and the Doves

                    A JACKDAW, seeing some Doves in a cote abundantly provided with
                    food, painted himself white and joined them in order to share
                    their plentiful maintenance.  The Doves, as long as he was
                    silent, supposed him to be one of themselves and admitted him to
                    their cote.  But when one day he forgot himself and began to
                    chatter, they discovered his true character and drove him forth,
                    pecking him with their beaks.  Failing to obtain food among the
                    Doves, he returned to the Jackdaws.  They too, not recognizing
                    him on account of his color.  expelled him from living with them.
                    So desiring two ends, he obtained neither.


                    The Horse and the Stag

                    AT ONE TIME the Horse had the plain entirely to himself.  Then a
                    Stag intruded into his domain and shared his pasture.  The Horse,
                    desiring to revenge himself on the stranger, asked a man if he
                    were willing to help him in punishing the Stag.  The man replied
                    that if the Horse would receive a bit in his mouth and agree to
                    carry him, he would contrive effective weapons against the Stag.
                    The Horse consented and allowed the man to mount him.  From that
                    hour he found that instead of obtaining revenge on the Stag, he
                    had enslaved himself to the service of man.


                    The Kid and the Wolf

                    A KID, returning without protection from the pasture, was pursued
                    by a Wolf.  Seeing he could not escape, he turned round, and
                    said:  "I know, friend Wolf, that I must be your prey, but before
                    I die I would ask of you one favor you will play me a tune to
                    which I may dance."  The Wolf complied, and while he was piping
                    and the Kid was dancing, some hounds hearing the sound ran up and
                    began chasing the Wolf.  Turning to the Kid, he said, "It is just
                    what I deserve; for I, who am only a butcher, should not have
                    turned piper to please you."


                    The Prophet

                    A WIZARD, sitting in the marketplace, was telling the fortunes of
                    the passers-by when a person ran up in great haste, and
                    announced to him that the doors of his house had been broken open
                    and that all his goods were being stolen.  He sighed heavily and
                    hastened away as fast as he could run.  A neighbor saw him
                    running and said, "Oh! you fellow there! you say you can foretell
                    the fortunes of others; how is it you did not foresee your own?'


                    The Fox and the Monkey

                    A FOX and a Monkey were traveling together on the same road.  As
                    they journeyed, they passed through a cemetery full of monuments.
                    "All these monuments which you see," said the Monkey, "are
                    erected in honor of my ancestors, who were in their day freedmen
                    and citizens of great renown."  The Fox replied, "You have chosen
                    a most appropriate subject for your falsehoods, as I am sure none
                    of your ancestors will be able to contradict you."

                    A false tale often betrays itself.


                    The Thief and the Housedog

                    A THIEF came in the night to break into a house.  He brought with
                    him several slices of meat in order to pacify the Housedog, so
                    that he would not alarm his master by barking.  As the Thief
                    threw him the pieces of meat, the Dog said, "If you think to stop
                    my mouth, you will be greatly mistaken.  This sudden kindness at
                    your hands will only make me more watchful, lest under these
                    unexpected favors to myself, you have some private ends to
                    accomplish for your own benefit, and for my master's injury."


                    The Man, the Horse, the Ox, and the Dog

                    A HORSE, Ox, and Dog, driven to great straits by the cold, sought
                    shelter and protection from Man.  He received them kindly,
                    lighted a fire, and warmed them.  He let the Horse make free with
                    his oats, gave the Ox an abundance of hay, and fed the Dog with
                    meat from his own table.  Grateful for these favors, the animals
                    determined to repay him to the best of their ability.  For this
                    purpose, they divided the term of his life between them, and each
                    endowed one portion of it with the qualities which chiefly
                    characterized himself.  The Horse chose his earliest years and
                    gave them his own attributes:  hence every man is in his youth
                    impetuous, headstrong, and obstinate in maintaining his own
                    opinion.  The Ox took under his patronage the next term of life,
                    and therefore man in his middle age is fond of work, devoted to
                    labor, and resolute to amass wealth and to husband his resources.
                    The end of life was reserved for the Dog, wherefore the old man
                    is often snappish, irritable, hard to please, and selfish,
                    tolerant only of his own household, but averse to strangers and
                    to all who do not administer to his comfort or to his
                    necessities.


                    The Apes and the Two Travelers

                    TWO MEN, one who always spoke the truth and the other who told
                    nothing but lies, were traveling together and by chance came to
                    the land of Apes.  One of the Apes, who had raised himself to be
                    king, commanded them to be seized and brought before him, that he
                    might know what was said of him among men.  He ordered at the
                    same time that all the Apes be arranged in a long row on his
                    right hand and on his left, and that a throne be placed for him,
                    as was the custom among men.  After these preparations he
                    signified that the two men should be brought before him, and
                    greeted them with this salutation:  "What sort of a king do I seem
                    to you to be, O strangers?'  The Lying Traveler replied, "You seem
                    to me a most mighty king."  "And what is your estimate of those
                    you see around me?'  "These," he made answer, "are worthy
                    companions of yourself, fit at least to be ambassadors and
                    leaders of armies."  The Ape and all his court, gratified with the
                    lie, commanded that a handsome present be given to the flatterer.
                    On this the truthful Traveler thought to himself, "If so great a
                    reward be given for a lie, with what gift may not I be rewarded,
                    if, according to my custom, I tell the truth?'  The Ape quickly
                    turned to him.  "And pray how do I and these my friends around me
                    seem to you?'  "Thou art," he said, "a most excellent Ape, and all
                    these thy companions after thy example are excellent Apes too."
                    The King of the Apes, enraged at hearing these truths, gave him
                    over to the teeth and claws of his companions.


                    The Wolf and the Shepherd

                    A WOLF followed a flock of sheep for a long time and did not
                    attempt to injure one of them.  The Shepherd at first stood on
                    his guard against him, as against an enemy, and kept a strict
                    watch over his movements.  But when the Wolf, day after day, kept
                    in the company of the sheep and did not make the slightest effort
                    to seize them, the Shepherd began to look upon him as a guardian
                    of his flock rather than as a plotter of evil against it; and
                    when occasion called him one day into the city, he left the sheep
                    entirely in his charge.  The Wolf, now that he had the
                    opportunity, fell upon the sheep, and destroyed the greater part
                    of the flock.  When the Shepherd returned to find his flock
                    destroyed, he exclaimed:  "I have been rightly served; why did I
                    trust my sheep to a Wolf?'


                    The Hares and the Lions

                    THE HARES harangued the assembly, and argued that all should be
                    equal.  The Lions made this reply:  "Your words, O Hares! are
                    good; but they lack both claws and teeth such as we have."


                    The Lark and Her Young Ones

                    A LARK had made her nest in the early spring on the young green
                    wheat.  The brood had almost grown to their full strength and
                    attained the use of their wings and the full plumage of their
                    feathers, when the owner of the field, looking over his ripe
                    crop, said, "The time has come when I must ask all my neighbors
                    to help me with my harvest."  One of the young Larks heard his
                    speech and related it to his mother, inquiring of her to what
                    place they should move for safety.  "There is no occasion to move
                    yet, my son," she replied; "the man who only sends to his friends
                    to help him with his harvest is not really in earnest."  The owner
                    of the field came again a few days later and saw the wheat
                    shedding the grain from excess of ripeness.  He said, "I will
                    come myself tomorrow with my laborers, and with as many reapers
                    as I can hire, and will get in the harvest."  The Lark on hearing
                    these words said to her brood, "It is time now to be off, my
                    little ones, for the man is in earnest this time; he no longer
                    trusts his friends, but will reap the field himself."

                    Self-help is the best help.


                    The Fox and the Lion

                    WHEN A FOX who had never yet seen a Lion, fell in with him by
                    chance for the first time in the forest, he was so frightened
                    that he nearly died with fear.  On meeting him for the second
                    time, he was still much alarmed, but not to the same extent as at
                    first.  On seeing him the third time, he so increased in boldness
                    that he went up to him and commenced a familiar conversation with
                    him.

                    Acquaintance softens prejudices.


                    The Weasel and the Mice

                    A WEASEL, inactive from age and infirmities, was not able to
                    catch mice as he once did.  He therefore rolled himself in flour
                    and lay down in a dark corner.  A Mouse, supposing him to be
                    food, leaped upon him, and was instantly caught and squeezed to
                    death.  Another perished in a similar manner, and then a third,
                    and still others after them.  A very old Mouse, who had escaped
                    many a trap and snare, observed from a safe distance the trick of
                    his crafty foe and said, "Ah! you that lie there, may you prosper
                    just in the same proportion as you are what you pretend to be!"


                    The Boy Bathing

                    A BOY bathing in a river was in danger of being drowned.  He
                    called out to a passing traveler for help, but instead of holding
                    out a helping hand, the man stood by unconcernedly, and scolded
                    the boy for his imprudence.  "Oh, sir!"  cried the youth, "pray
                    help me now and scold me afterwards."

                    Counsel without help is useless.


                    The and the Wolf

                    AN feeding in a meadow saw a Wolf approaching to seize him,
                    and immediately pretended to be lame.  The Wolf, coming up,
                    inquired the cause of his lameness.  The replied that passing
                    through a hedge he had trod with his foot upon a sharp thorn.  He
                    requested that the Wolf pull it out, lest when he ate him it
                    should injure his throat.  The Wolf consented and lifted up the
                    foot, and was giving his whole mind to the discovery of the
                    thorn, when the, with his heels, kicked his teeth into his
                    mouth and galloped away.  The Wolf, being thus fearfully mauled,
                    said, "I am rightly served, for why did I attempt the art of
                    healing, when my father only taught me the trade of a butcher?'


                    The Seller of Images

                    A CERTAIN MAN made a wooden image of Mercury and offered it for
                    sale.  When no one appeared willing to buy it, in order to
                    attract purchasers, he cried out that he had the statue to sell
                    of a benefactor who bestowed wealth and helped to heap up riches.
                    One of the bystanders said to him, "My good fellow, why do you
                    sell him, being such a one as you describe, when you may yourself
                    enjoy the good things he has to give?'  "Why," he replied, "I am
                    in need of immediate help, and he is wont to give his good gifts
                    very slowly."


                    The Fox and the Grapes

                    A FAMISHED FOX saw some clusters of ripe black grapes hanging
                    from a trellised vine.  She resorted to all her tricks to get at
                    them, but wearied herself in vain, for she could not reach them.
                    At last she turned away, hiding her disappointment and saying:
                    "The Grapes are sour, and not ripe as I thought."


                    The Man and His Wife

                    A MAN had a Wife who made herself hated by all the members of his
                    household.  Wishing to find out if she had the same effect on the
                    persons in her father's house, he made some excuse to send her
                    home on a visit to her father.  After a short time she returned,
                    and when he inquired how she had got on and how the servants had
                    treated her, she replied, "The herdsmen and shepherds cast on me
                    looks of aversion."  He said, "O Wife, if you were disliked by
                    those who go out early in the morning with their flocks and
                    return late in the evening, what must have been felt towards you
                    by those with whom you passed the whole day!"

                    Straws show how the wind blows.


                    The Peacock and Juno

                    THE PEACOCK made complaint to Juno that, while the nightingale
                    pleased every ear with his song, he himself no sooner opened his
                    mouth than he became a laughingstock to all who heard him.  The
                    Goddess, to console him, said, "But you far excel in beauty and
                    in size.  The splendor of the emerald shines in your neck and you
                    unfold a tail gorgeous with painted plumage."  "But for what
                    purpose have I," said the bird, "this dumb beauty so long as I am
                    surpassed in song?'   "The lot of each," replied Juno, "has been
                    assigned by the will of the Fates--to thee, beauty; to the eagle,
                    strength; to the nightingale, song; to the raven, favorable,
                    and to the crow, unfavorable auguries.  These are all contented
                    with the endowments allotted to them."


                    The Hawk and the Nightingale

                    A NIGHTINGALE, sitting aloft upon an oak and singing according to
                    his wont, was seen by a Hawk who, being in need of food, swooped
                    down and seized him.  The Nightingale, about to lose his life,
                    earnestly begged the Hawk to let him go, saying that he was not
                    big enough to satisfy the hunger of a Hawk who, if he wanted
                    food, ought to pursue the larger birds.  The Hawk, interrupting
                    him, said:  "I should indeed have lost my senses if I should let
                    go food ready in my hand, for the sake of pursuing birds which
                    are not yet even within sight."


                    The Dog, the Cock, and the Fox

                    A DOG and a Cock being great friends, agreed to travel together.
                    At nightfall they took shelter in a thick wood.  The Cock flying
                    up, perched himself on the branches of a tree, while the Dog
                    found a bed beneath in the hollow trunk.  When the morning
                    dawned, the Cock, as usual, crowed very loudly several times.  A
                    Fox heard the sound, and wishing to make a breakfast on him, came
                    and stood under the branches, saying how earnestly he desired to
                    make the acquaintance of the owner of so magnificent a voice.
                    The Cock, suspecting his civilities, said:  "Sir, I wish you would
                    do me the favor of going around to the hollow trunk below me, and
                    waking my porter, so that he may open the door and let you in."
                    When the Fox approached the tree, the Dog sprang out and caught
                    him, and tore him to pieces.


                    The Wolf and the Goat

                    A WOLF saw a Goat feeding at the summit of a steep precipice,
                    where he had no chance of reaching her.  He called to her and
                    earnestly begged her to come lower down, lest she fall by some
                    mishap; and he added that the meadows lay where he was standing,
                    and that the herbage was most tender.  She replied, "No, my
                    friend, it is not for the pasture that you invite me, but for
                    yourself, who are in want of food."


                    The Lion and the Bull

                    A LION, greatly desiring to capture a Bull, and yet afraid to
                    attack him on account of his great size, resorted to a trick to
                    ensure his destruction.  He approached the Bull and said, "I have
                    slain a fine sheep, my friend; and if you will come home and
                    partake of him with me, I shall be delighted to have your
                    company."  The Lion said this in the hope that, as the Bull was in
                    the act of reclining to eat, he might attack him to advantage,
                    and make his meal on him.  The Bull, on approaching the Lion's
                    den, saw the huge spits and giant caldrons, and no sign whatever
                    of the sheep, and, without saying a word, quietly took his
                    departure.  The Lion inquired why he went off so abruptly without
                    a word of salutation to his host, who had not given him any cause
                    for offense.  "I have reasons enough," said the Bull.  "I see no
                    indication whatever of your having slaughtered a sheep, while I
                    do see very plainly every preparation for your dining on a bull."



                    The Goat and the

                    A MAN once kept a Goat and an.  The Goat, envying the on
                    account of his greater abundance of food, said, "How shamefully
                    you are treated:  at one time grinding in the mill, and at another
                    carrying heavy burdens"; and he further advised him to pretend to
                    be epileptic and fall into a ditch and so obtain rest.  The listened to his words, and falling into a ditch, was very much
                    bruised.  His master, sending for a leech, asked his advice.  He
                    bade him pour upon the wounds the lungs of a Goat.  They at once
                    killed the Goat, and so healed the.


                    The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse

                    A COUNTRY MOUSE invited a Town Mouse, an intimate friend, to pay
                    him a visit and partake of his country fare.  As they were on the
                    bare plowlands, eating there wheat-stocks and roots pulled up
                    from the hedgerow, the Town Mouse said to his friend, "You live
                    here the life of the ants, while in my house is the horn of
                    plenty.  I am surrounded by every luxury, and if you will come
                    with me, as I wish you would, you shall have an ample share of my
                    dainties."  The Country Mouse was easily persuaded, and returned
                    to town with his friend.  On his arrival, the Town Mouse placed
                    before him bread, barley, beans, dried figs, honey, raisins, and,
                    last of all, brought a dainty piece of cheese from a basket.  The
                    Country Mouse, being much delighted at the sight of such good
                    cheer, expressed his satisfaction in warm terms and lamented his
                    own hard fate.  Just as they were beginning to eat, someone
                    opened the door, and they both ran off squeaking, as fast as they
                    could, to a hole so narrow that two could only find room in it by
                    squeezing.  They had scarcely begun their repast again when
                    someone else entered to take something out of a cupboard,
                    whereupon the two Mice, more frightened than before, ran away and
                    hid themselves.  At last the Country Mouse, almost famished, said
                    to his friend:  "Although you have prepared for me so dainty a
                    feast, I must leave you to enjoy it by yourself.  It is
                    surrounded by too many dangers to please me.  I prefer my bare
                    plowlands and roots from the hedgerow, where I can live in
                    safety, and without fear."


                    The Wolf, the Fox, and the Ape

                    A WOLF accused a Fox of theft, but the Fox entirely denied the
                    charge.  An Ape undertook to adjudge the matter between them.
                    When each had fully stated his case the Ape announced this
                    sentence:  "I do not think you, Wolf, ever lost what you claim;
                    and I do believe you, Fox, to have stolen what you so stoutly
                    deny."

                    The dishonest, if they act honestly, get no credit.


                    The Fly and the Draught-Mule

                    A FLY sat on the axle-tree of a chariot, and addressing the
                    Draught-Mule said, "How slow you are! Why do you not go faster?
                    See if I do not prick your neck with my sting."  The Draught-Mule
                    replied, "I do not heed your threats; I only care for him who
                    sits above you, and who quickens my pace with his whip, or holds
                    me back with the reins.  Away, therefore, with your insolence,
                    for I know well when to go fast, and when to go slow."


                    The Fishermen

                    SOME FISHERMEN were out trawling their nets.  Perceiving them to
                    be very heavy, they danced about for joy and supposed that they
                    had taken a large catch.  When they had dragged the nets to the
                    shore they found but few fish:  the nets were full of sand and
                    stones, and the men were beyond measure cast downso much at the
                    disappointment which had befallen them, but because they had
                    formed such very different expectations.  One of their company,
                    an old man, said, "Let us cease lamenting, my mates, for, as it
                    seems to me, sorrow is always the twin sister of joy; and it was
                    only to be looked for that we, who just now were over-rejoiced,
                    should next have something to make us sad."


                    The Lion and the Three Bulls

                    THREE BULLS for a long time pastured together.  A Lion lay in
                    ambush in the hope of making them his prey, but was afraid to
                    attack them while they kept together.  Having at last by guileful
                    speeches succeeded in separating them, he attacked them without
                    fear as they fed alone, and feasted on them one by one at his own
                    leisure.

                    Union is strength.


                    The Fowler and the Viper

                    A FOWLER, taking his bird-lime and his twigs, went out to catch
                    birds.  Seeing a thrush sitting upon a tree, he wished to take
                    it, and fitting his twigs to a proper length, watched intently,
                    having his whole thoughts directed towards the sky.  While thus
                    looking upwards, he unknowingly trod upon a Viper asleep just
                    before his feet.  The Viper, turning about, stung him, and
                    falling into a swoon, the man said to himself, "Woe is me! that
                    while I purposed to hunt another, I am myself fallen unawares
                    into the snares of death."


                    The Horse and the

                    A HORSE, proud of his fine trappings, met an on the highway.
                    The, being heavily laden, moved slowly out of the way.
                    "Hardly," said the Horse, "can I resist kicking you with my
                    heels."  The held his peace, and made only a silent appeal to
                    the justice of the gods.  Not long afterwards the Horse, having
                    become broken-winded, was sent by his owner to the farm.  The, seeing him drawing a dungcart, thus derided him:  "Where, O
                    boaster, are now all thy gay trappings, thou who are thyself
                    reduced to the condition you so lately treated with contempt?'


                    The Fox and the Mask

                    A FOX entered the house of an actor and, rummaging through all
                    his properties, came upon a Mask, an admirable imitation of a
                    human head.  He placed his paws on it and said, "What a beautiful
                    head! Yet it is of no value, as it entirely lacks brains."


                    The Geese and the Cranes

                    THE GEESE and the Cranes were feeding in the same meadow, when a
                    birdcatcher came to ensnare them in his nets.  The Cranes, being
                    light of wing, fled away at his approach; while the Geese, being
                    slower of flight and heavier in their bodies, were captured.


                    The Blind Man and the Whelp

                    A BLIND MAN was accustomed to distinguishing different animals by
                    touching them with his hands.  The whelp of a Wolf was brought
                    him, with a request that he would feel it, and say what it was.
                    He felt it, and being in doubt, said:  "I do not quite know
                    whether it is the cub of a Fox, or the whelp of a Wolf, but this
                    I know full well.  It would not be safe to admit him to the
                    sheepfold."

                    Evil tendencies are shown in early life.


                    The Dogs and the Fox

                    SOME DOGS, finding the skin of a lion, began to tear it in pieces
                    with their teeth.  A Fox, seeing them, said, "If this lion were
                    alive, you would soon find out that his claws were stronger than
                    your teeth."

                    It is easy to kick a man that is down.


                    The Cobbler Turned Doctor

                    A COBBLER unable to make a living by his trade and made desperate
                    by poverty, began to practice medicine in a town in which he was
                    not known.  He sold a drug, pretending that it was an antidote to
                    all poisons, and obtained a great name for himself by long-winded
                    puffs and advertisements.  When the Cobbler happened to fall sick
                    himself of a serious illness, the Governor of the town determined
                    to test his skill.  For this purpose he called for a cup, and
                    while filling it with water, pretended to mix poison with the
                    Cobbler's antidote, commanding him to drink it on the promise of
                    a reward.  The Cobbler, under the fear of death, confessed that
                    he had no knowledge of medicine, and was only made famous by the
                    stupid clamors of the crowd.  The Governor then called a public
                    assembly and addressed the citizens:  "Of what folly have you been
                    guilty? You have not hesitated to entrust your heads to a man,
                    whom no one could employ to make even the shoes for their feet."


                    The Wolf and the Horse

                    A WOLF coming out of a field of oats met a Horse and thus
                    addressed him:  "I would advise you to go into that field.  It is
                    full of fine oats, which I have left untouched for you, as you
                    are a friend whom I would love to hear enjoying good eating."  The
                    Horse replied, "If oats had been the food of wolves, you would
                    never have indulged your ears at the cost of your belly."

                    Men of evil reputation, when they perform a good deed, fail to
                    get credit for it.


                    The Brother and the Sister

                    A FATHER had one son and one daughter, the former remarkable for
                    his good looks, the latter for her extraordinary ugliness.  While
                    they were playing one day as children, they happened by chance to
                    look together into a mirror that was placed on their mother's
                    chair.  The boy congratulated himself on his good looks; the girl
                    grew angry, and could not bear the self-praises of her Brother,
                    interpreting all he said (and how could she do otherwise?) into
                    reflection on herself.  She ran off to her father.  to be avenged
                    on her Brother, and spitefully accused him of having, as a boy,
                    made use of that which belonged only to girls.  The father
                    embraced them both, and bestowing his kisses and affection
                    impartially on each, said, "I wish you both would look into the
                    mirror every day:  you, my son, that you may not spoil your beauty
                    by evil conduct; and you, my daughter, that you may make up for
                    your lack of beauty by your virtues."


                    The Wasps, the Partridges, and the Farmer

                    THE WASPS and the Partridges, overcome with thirst, came to a
                    Farmer and besought him to give them some water to drink.  They
                    promised amply to repay him the favor which they asked.  The
                    Partridges declared that they would dig around his vines and make
                    them produce finer grapes.  The Wasps said that they would keep
                    guard and drive off thieves with their stings.  But the Farmer
                    interrupted them, saying:  "I have already two oxen, who, without
                    making any promises, do all these things.  It is surely better
                    for me to give the water to them than to you."


                    The Crow and Mercury

                    A CROW caught in a snare prayed to Apollo to release him, making
                    a vow to offer some frankincense at his shrine.  But when rescued
                    from his danger, he forgot his promise.  Shortly afterwards,
                    again caught in a snare, he passed by Apollo and made the same
                    promise to offer frankincense to Mercury.  Mercury soon appeared
                    and said to him, "O thou most base fellow? how can I believe
                    thee, who hast disowned and wronged thy former patron?'


                    The North Wind and the Sun

                    THE NORTH WIND and the Sun disputed as to which was the most
                    powerful, and agreed that he should be declared the victor who
                    could first strip a wayfaring man of his clothes.  The North Wind
                    first tried his power and blew with all his might, but the keener
                    his blasts, the closer the Traveler wrapped his cloak around him,
                    until at last, resigning all hope of victory, the Wind called
                    upon the Sun to see what he could do.  The Sun suddenly shone out
                    with all his warmth.  The Traveler no sooner felt his genial rays
                    than he took off one garment after another, and at last, fairly
                    overcome with heat, undressed and bathed in a stream that lay in
                    his path.

                    Persuasion is better than Force.


                    The Two Men Who Were Enemies

                    TWO MEN, deadly enemies to each other, were sailing in the same
                    vessel.  Determined to keep as far apart as possible, the one
                    seated himself in the stem, and the other in the prow of the
                    ship.  A violent storm arose, and with the vessel in great danger
                    of sinking, the one in the stern inquired of the pilot which of
                    the two ends of the ship would go down first.  On his replying
                    that he supposed it would be the prow, the Man said, "Death would
                    not be grievous to me, if I could only see my Enemy die before
                    me."


                    The Gamecocks and the Partridge

                    A MAN had two Gamecocks in his poultry-yard.  One day by chance
                    he found a tame Partridge for sale.  He purchased it and brought
                    it home to be reared with his Gamecocks.  When the Partridge was
                    put into the poultry-yard, they struck at it and followed it
                    about, so that the Partridge became grievously troubled and
                    supposed that he was thus evilly treated because he was a
                    stranger.  Not long afterwards he saw the Cocks fighting together
                    and not separating before one had well beaten the other.  He then
                    said to himself, "I shall no longer distress myself at being
                    struck at by these Gamecocks, when I see that they cannot even
                    refrain from quarreling with each other."


                    The Quack Frog

                    A FROG once upon a time came forth from his home in the marsh and
                    proclaimed to all the beasts that he was a learned physician,
                    skilled in the use of drugs and able to heal all diseases.  A Fox
                    asked him, "How can you pretend to prescribe for others, when you
                    are unable to heal your own lame gait and wrinkled skin?'


                    The Lion, the Wolf, and the Fox

                    A LION, growing old, lay sick in his cave.  All the beasts came
                    to visit their king, except the Fox.  The Wolf therefore,
                    thinking that he had a capital opportunity, accused the Fox to
                    the Lion of not paying any respect to him who had the rule over
                    them all and of not coming to visit him.  At that very moment the
                    Fox came in and heard these last words of the Wolf.  The Lion
                    roaring out in a rage against him, the Fox sought an opportunity
                    to defend himself and said, "And who of all those who have come
                    to you have benefited you so much as I, who have traveled from
                    place to place in every direction, and have sought and learnt
                    from the physicians the means of healing you?'  The Lion commanded
                    him immediately to tell him the cure, when he replied, "You must
                    flay a wolf alive and wrap his skin yet warm around you."  The
                    Wolf was at once taken and flayed; whereon the Fox, turning to
                    him, said with a smile, "You should have moved your master not to
                    ill, but to good, will."


                    The Dog's House

                    IN THE WINTERTIME, a Dog curled up in as small a space as
                    possible on account of the cold, determined to make himself a
                    house.  However when the summer returned again, he lay asleep
                    stretched at his full length and appeared to himself to be of a
                    great size.  Now he considered that it would be neither an easy
                    nor a necessary work to make himself such a house as would
                    accommodate him.


                    The Wolf and the Lion

                    ROAMING BY the mountainside at sundown, a Wolf saw his own shadow
                    become greatly extended and magnified, and he said to himself,
                    "Why should I, being of such an immense size and extending nearly
                    an acre in length, be afraid of the Lion? Ought I not to be
                    acknowledged as King of all the collected beasts?'  While he was
                    indulging in these proud thoughts, a Lion fell upon him and
                    killed him.  He exclaimed with a too late repentance, "Wretched
                    me! this overestimation of myself is the cause of my
                    destruction."


                    The Birds, the Beasts, and the Bat

                    THE BIRDS waged war with the Beasts, and each were by turns the
                    conquerors.  A Bat, fearing the uncertain issues of the fight,
                    always fought on the side which he felt was the strongest.  When
                    peace was proclaimed, his deceitful conduct was apparent to both
                    combatants.  Therefore being condemned by each for his treachery,
                    he was driven forth from the light of day, and henceforth
                    concealed himself in dark hiding-places, flying always alone and
                    at night.


                    The Spendthrift and the Swallow

                    A YOUNG MAN, a great spendthrift, had run through all his
                    patrimony and had but one good cloak left.  One day he happened
                    to see a Swallow, which had appeared before its season, skimming
                    along a pool and twittering gaily.  He supposed that summer had
                    come, and went and sold his cloak.  Not many days later, winter
                    set in again with renewed frost and cold.  When he found the
                    unfortunate Swallow lifeless on the ground, he said, "Unhappy
                    bird! what have you done? By thus appearing before the springtime
                    you have not only killed yourself, but you have wrought my
                    destruction also."


                    The Fox and the Lion

                    A FOX saw a Lion confined in a cage, and standing near him,
                    bitterly reviled him.  The Lion said to the Fox, "It is not thou
                    who revilest me; but this mischance which has befallen me."


                    The Owl and the Birds

                    AN OWL, in her wisdom, counseled the Birds that when the acorn
                    first began to sprout, to pull it all up out of the ground and
                    not allow it to grow.  She said acorns would produce mistletoe,
                    from which an irremediable poison, the bird-
                    lime, would be extracted and by which they would be captured.
                    The Owl next advised them to pluck up the seed of the flax, which
                    men had sown, as it was a plant which boded no good to them.
                    And, lastly, the Owl, seeing an archer approach, predicted that
                    this man, being on foot, would contrive darts armed with feathers
                    which would fly faster than the wings of the Birds themselves.
                    The Birds gave no credence to these warning words, but considered
                    the Owl to be beside herself and said that she was mad.  But
                    afterwards, finding her words were true, they wondered at her
                    knowledge and deemed her to be the wisest of birds.  Hence it is
                    that when she appears they look to her as knowing all things,
                    while she no longer gives them advice, but in solitude laments
                    their past folly.


                    The Trumpeter Taken Prisoner

                    A TRUMPETER, bravely leading on the soldiers, was captured by the
                    enemy.  He cried out to his captors, "Pray spare me, and do not
                    take my life without cause or without inquiry.  I have not slain
                    a single man of your troop.  I have no arms, and carry nothing
                    but this one brass trumpet."  "That is the very reason for which
                    you should be put to death," they said; "for, while you do not
                    fight yourself, your trumpet stirs all the others to battle."


                    The in the Lion's Skin

                    AN, having put on the Lion's skin, roamed about in the forest
                    and amused himself by frightening all the foolish animals he met
                    in his wanderings.  At last coming upon a Fox, he tried to
                    frighten him also, but the Fox no sooner heard the sound of his
                    voice than he exclaimed, "I might possibly have been frightened
                    myself, if I had not heard your bray."


                    The Sparrow and the Hare

                    A HARE pounced upon by an eagle sobbed very much and uttered
                    cries like a child.  A Sparrow upbraided her and said, "Where now
                    is thy remarkable swiftness of foot? Why were your feet so slow?"
                    While the Sparrow was thus speaking, a hawk suddenly seized him
                    and killed him.  The Hare was comforted in her death, and
                    expiring said, "Ah! you who so lately, when you supposed yourself
                    safe, exulted over my calamity, have now reason to deplore a
                    similar misfortune."


                    The Flea and the Ox

                    A FLEA thus questioned an Ox:  "What ails you, that being so huge
                    and strong, you submit to the wrongs you receive from men and
                    slave for them day by day, while I, being so small a creature,
                    mercilessly feed on their flesh and drink their blood without
                    stint?'  The Ox replied:  "I do not wish to be ungrateful, for I am
                    loved and well cared for by men, and they often pat my head and
                    shoulders."  "Woe's me!"  said the flea; "this very patting which
                    you like, whenever it happens to me, brings with it my inevitable
                    destruction."


                    The Goods and the Ills

                    ALL the Goods were once driven out by the Ills from that common
                    share which they each had in the affairs of mankind; for the Ills
                    by reason of their numbers had prevailed to possess the earth.
                    The Goods wafted themselves to heaven and asked for a righteous
                    vengeance on their persecutors.  They entreated Jupiter that they
                    might no longer be associated with the Ills, as they had nothing
                    in common and could not live together, but were engaged in
                    unceasing warfare; and that an indissoluble law might be laid
                    down for their future protection.  Jupiter granted their request
                    and decreed that henceforth the Ills should visit the earth in
                    company with each other, but that the Goods should one by one
                    enter the habitations of men.  Hence it arises that Ills abound,
                    for they come not one by one, but in troops, and by no means
                    singly:  while the Goods proceed from Jupiter, and are given, not
                    alike to all, but singly, and separately; and one by one to those
                    who are able to discern them.


                    The Dove and the Crow

                    A DOVE shut up in a cage was boasting of the large number of
                    young ones which she had hatched.  A Crow hearing her, said:  "My
                    good friend, cease from this unseasonable boasting.  The larger
                    the number of your family, the greater your cause of sorrow, in
                    seeing them shut up in this prison-house."


                    Mercury and the Workmen

                    A WORKMAN, felling wood by the side of a river, let his axe drop
                    - by accident into a deep pool.  Being thus deprived of the means
                    of his livelihood, he sat down on the bank and lamented his hard
                    fate.  Mercury appeared and demanded the cause of his tears.
                    After he told him his misfortune, Mercury plunged into the
                    stream, and, bringing up a golden axe, inquired if that were the
                    one he had lost.  On his saying that it was not his, Mercury
                    disappeared beneath the water a second time, returned with a
                    silver axe in his hand, and again asked the Workman if it were
                    his.  When the Workman said it was not, he dived into the pool
                    for the third time and brought up the axe that had been lost.
                    The Workman claimed it and expressed his joy at its recovery.
                    Mercury, pleased with his honesty, gave him the golden and silver
                    axes in addition to his own.    The Workman, on his return to his
                    house, related to his companions all that had happened.  One of
                    them at once resolved to try and secure the same good fortune for
                    himself.  He ran to the river and threw his axe on purpose into
                    the pool at the same place, and sat down on the bank to weep.
                    Mercury appeared to him just as he hoped he would; and having
                    learned the cause of his grief, plunged into the stream and
                    brought up a golden axe, inquiring if he had lost it.  The
                    Workman seized it greedily, and declared that truly it was the
                    very same axe that he had lost.  Mercury, displeased at his
                    knavery, not only took away the golden axe, but refused to
                    recover for him the axe he had thrown into the pool.


                    The Eagle and the Jackdaw

                    AN EAGLE, flying down from his perch on a lofty rock, seized upon
                    a lamb and carried him aloft in his talons.  A Jackdaw, who
                    witnessed the capture of the lamb, was stirred with envy and
                    determined to emulate the strength and flight of the Eagle.  He
                    flew around with a great whir of his wings and settled upon a
                    large ram, with the intention of carrying him off, but his claws
                    became entangled in the ram's fleece and he was not able to
                    release himself, although he fluttered with his feathers as much
                    as he could.  The shepherd, seeing what had happened, ran up and
                    caught him.  He at once clipped the Jackdaw's wings, and taking
                    him home at night, gave him to his children.  On their saying,
                    "Father, what kind of bird is it?'  he replied, "To my certain
                    knowledge he is a Daw; but he would like you to think an Eagle."



                    The Fox and the Crane

                    A FOX invited a Crane to supper and provided nothing for his
                    entertainment but some soup made of pulse, which was poured out
                    into a broad flat stone dish.  The soup fell out of the long bill
                    of the Crane at every mouthful, and his vexation at not being
                    able to eat afforded the Fox much amusement.  The Crane, in his
                    turn, asked the Fox to sup with him, and set before her a flagon
                    with a long narrow mouth, so that he could easily insert his neck
                    and enjoy its contents at his leisure.  The Fox, unable even to
                    taste it, met with a fitting requital, after the fashion of her
                    own hospitality.


                    Jupiter, Neptune, Minerva, and Momus

                    ACCORDING to an ancient legend, the first man was made by
                    Jupiter, the first bull by Neptune, and the first house by
                    Minerva.  On the completion of their labors, a dispute arose as
                    to which had made the most perfect work.  They agreed to appoint
                    Momus as judge, and to abide by his decision.  Momus, however,
                    being very envious of the handicraft of each, found fault with
                    all.  He first blamed the work of Neptune because he had not made
                    the horns of the bull below his eyes, so he might better see
                    where to strike.  He then condemned the work of Jupiter, because
                    he had not placed the heart of man on the outside, that everyone
                    might read the thoughts of the evil disposed and take precautions
                    against the intended mischief.  And, lastly, he inveighed against
                    Minerva because she had not contrived iron wheels in the
                    foundation of her house, so its inhabitants might more easily
                    remove if a neighbor proved unpleasant.  Jupiter, indignant at
                    such inveterate faultfinding, drove him from his office of judge,
                    and expelled him from the mansions of Olympus.


                    The Eagle and the Fox

                    AN EAGLE and a Fox formed an intimate friendship and decided to
                    live near each other.  The Eagle built her nest in the branches
                    of a tall tree, while the Fox crept into the underwood and there
                    produced her young.  Not long after they had agreed upon this
                    plan, the Eagle, being in want of provision for her young ones,
                    swooped down while the Fox was out, seized upon one of the little
                    cubs, and feasted herself and her brood.  The Fox on her return,
                    discovered what had happened, but was less grieved for the death
                    of her young than for her inability to avenge them.  A just
                    retribution, however, quickly fell upon the Eagle.  While
                    hovering near an altar, on which some villagers were sacrificing
                    a goat, she suddenly seized a piece of the flesh, and carried it,
                    along with a burning cinder, to her nest.  A strong breeze soon
                    fanned the spark into a flame, and the eaglets, as yet unfledged
                    and helpless, were roasted in their nest and dropped down dead at
                    the bottom of the tree.  There, in the sight of the Eagle, the
                    Fox gobbled them up.


                    The Man and the Satyr

                    A MAN and a Satyr once drank together in token of a bond of
                    alliance being formed between them.  One very cold wintry day, as
                    they talked, the Man put his fingers to his mouth and blew on
                    them.  When the Satyr asked the reason for this, he told him that
                    he did it to warm his hands because they were so cold.  Later on
                    in the day they sat down to eat, and the food prepared was quite
                    scalding.  The Man raised one of the dishes a little towards his
                    mouth and blew in it.  When the Satyr again inquired the reason,
                    he said that he did it to cool the meat, which was too hot.  "I
                    can no longer consider you as a friend," said the Satyr, "a
                    fellow who with the same breath blows hot and cold."


                    The and His Purchaser

                    A MAN wished to purchase an, and agreed with its owner that
                    he should try out the animal before he bought him.  He took the
                    home and put him in the straw-yard with his other, upon
                    which the new animal left all the others and at once joined the
                    one that was most idle and the greatest eater of them all.
                    Seeing this, the man put a halter on him and led him back to his
                    owner.  On being asked how, in so short a time, he could have
                    made a trial of him, he answered, "I do not need a trial; I know
                    that he will be just the same as the one he chose for his
                    companion."

                    A man is known by the company he keeps.


                    The Two Bags

                    EVERY MAN, according to an ancient legend, is born into the world
                    with two bags suspended from his neck   all bag in front full of
                    his neighbors' faults, and a large bag behind filled with his own
                    faults.  Hence it is that men are quick to see the faults of
                    others, and yet are often blind to their own failings.


                    The Stag at the Pool

                    A STAG overpowered by heat came to a spring to drink.  Seeing his
                    own shadow reflected in the water, he greatly admired the size
                    and variety of his horns, but felt angry with himself for having
                    such slender and weak feet.  While he was thus contemplating
                    himself, a Lion appeared at the pool and crouched to spring upon
                    him.  The Stag immediately took to flight, and exerting his
                    utmost speed, as long as the plain was smooth and open kept
                    himself easily at a safe distance from the Lion.  But entering a
                    wood he became entangled by his horns, and the Lion quickly came
                    up to him and caught him.  When too late, he thus reproached
                    himself:  "Woe is me! How I have deceived myself! These feet which
                    would have saved me I despised, and I gloried in these antlers
                    which have proved my destruction."

                    What is most truly valuable is often underrated.


                    The Jackdaw and the Fox

                    A HALF-FAMISHED JACKDAW seated himself on a fig-tree, which had
                    produced some fruit entirely out of season, and waited in the
                    hope that the figs would ripen.  A Fox seeing him sitting so long
                    and learning the reason of his doing so, said to him, "You are
                    indeed, sir, sadly deceiving yourself; you are indulging a hope
                    strong enough to cheat you, but which will never reward you with
                    enjoyment."


                    The Lark Burying Her Father

                    THE LARK (according to an ancient legend) was created before the
                    earth itself, and when her father died, as there was no earth,
                    she could find no place of burial for him.  She let him lie
                    uninterred for five days, and on the sixth day, not knowing what
                    else to do, she buried him in her own head.  Hence she obtained
                    her crest, which is popularly said to be her father's
                    grave-hillock.

                    Youth's first duty is reverence to parents.


                    The Gnat and the Bull

                    A GNAT settled on the horn of a Bull, and sat there a long time.
                    Just as he was about to fly off, he made a buzzing noise, and
                    inquired of the Bull if he would like him to go.  The Bull
                    replied, "I did not know you had come, and I shall not miss you
                    when you go away."

                    Some men are of more consequence in their own eyes than in the
                    eyes of their neighbors.


                    The and Her Whelps

                    A, ready to whelp, earnestly begged a shepherd for a place
                    where she might litter.  When her request was granted, she
                    besought permission to rear her puppies in the same spot.  The
                    shepherd again consented.  But at last the, protected by
                    the bodyguard of her Whelps, who had now grown up and were able
                    to defend themselves, asserted her exclusive right to the place
                    and would not permit the shepherd to approach.


                    The Dogs and the Hides

                    SOME DOGS famished with hunger saw a number of cowhides steeping
                    in a river.  Not being able to reach them, they agreed to drink
                    up the river, but it happened that they burst themselves with
                    drinking long before they reached the hides.

                    Attempt not impossibilities.


                    The Shepherd and the Sheep

                    A SHEPHERD driving his Sheep to a wood, saw an oak of unusual
                    size full of acorns, and spreading his cloak under the branches,
                    he climbed up into the tree and shook them down.  The Sheep
                    eating the acorns inadvertently frayed and tore the cloak.  When
                    the Shepherd came down and saw what was done, he said, "O you
                    most ungrateful creatures! You provide wool to make garments for
                    all other men, but you destroy the clothes of him who feeds you."



                    The Grasshopper and the Owl

                    AN OWL, accustomed to feed at night and to sleep during the day,
                    was greatly disturbed by the noise of a Grasshopper and earnestly
                    besought her to stop chirping.  The Grasshopper refused to
                    desist, and chirped louder and louder the more the Owl entreated.
                    When she saw that she could get no redress and that her words
                    were despised, the Owl attacked the chatterer by a stratagem.
                    "Since I cannot sleep," she said, "on account of your song which,
                    believe me, is sweet as the lyre of Apollo, I shall indulge
                    myself in drinking some nectar which Pallas lately gave me.  If
                    you do not dislike it, come to me and we will drink it together."
                    The Grasshopper, who was thirsty, and pleased with the praise of
                    her voice, eagerly flew up.  The Owl came forth from her hollow,
                    seized her, and put her to death.


                    The Monkey and the Camel

                    THE BEASTS of the forest gave a splendid entertainment at which
                    the Monkey stood up and danced.  Having vastly delighted the
                    assembly, he sat down amidst universal applause.  The Camel,
                    envious of the praises bestowed on the Monkey and desiring to
                    divert to himself the favor of the guests, proposed to stand up
                    in his turn and dance for their amusement.  He moved about in so
                    utterly ridiculous a manner that the Beasts, in a fit of
                    indignation, set upon him with clubs and drove him out of the
                    assembly.

                    It is absurd to ape our betters.


                    The Peasant and the Apple-Tree

                    A PEASANT had in his garden an Apple-Tree which bore no fruit but
                    only served as a harbor for the sparrows and grasshoppers.  He
                    resolved to cut it down, and taking his axe in his hand, made a
                    bold stroke at its roots.  The grasshoppers and sparrows
                    entreated him not to cut down the tree that sheltered them, but
                    to spare it, and they would sing to him and lighten his labors.
                    He paid no attention to their request, but gave the tree a second
                    and a third blow with his axe.  When he reached the hollow of the
                    tree, he found a hive full of honey.  Having tasted the
                    honeycomb, he threw down his axe, and looking on the tree as
                    sacred, took great care of it.

                    Self-interest alone moves some men.


                    The Two Soldiers and the Robber

                    TWO SOLDIERS traveling together were set upon by a Robber.  The
                    one fled away; the other stood his ground and defended himself
                    with his stout right hand.  The Robber being slain, the timid
                    companion ran up and drew his sword, and then, throwing back his
                    traveling cloak said, "I'll at him, and I'll take care he shall
                    learn whom he has attacked."  On this, he who had fought with the
                    Robber made answer, "I only wish that you had helped me just now,
                    even if it had been only with those words, for I should have been
                    the more encouraged, believing them to be true; but now put up
                    your sword in its sheath and hold your equally useless tongue,
                    till you can deceive others who do not know you.  I, indeed, who
                    have experienced with what speed you run away, know right well
                    that no dependence can be placed on your valor."


                    The Trees Under the Protection of the Gods

                    THE GODS, according to an ancient legend, made choice of certain
                    trees to be under their special protection.  Jupiter chose the
                    oak, Venus the myrtle, Apollo the laurel, Cybele the pine, and
                    Hercules the poplar.  Minerva, wondering why they had preferred
                    trees not yielding fruit, inquired the reason for their choice.
                    Jupiter replied, "It is lest we should seem to covet the honor
                    for the fruit."  But said Minerva, "Let anyone say what he will
                    the olive is more dear to me on account of its fruit."  Then said
                    Jupiter, "My daughter, you are rightly called wise; for unless
                    what we do is useful, the glory of it is vain."


                    The Mother and the Wolf

                    A FAMISHED WOLF was prowling about in the morning in search of
                    food.  As he passed the door of a cottage built in the forest, he
                    heard a Mother say to her child, "Be quiet, or I will throw you
                    out of the window, and the Wolf shall eat you."  The Wolf sat all
                    day waiting at the door.  In the evening he heard the same woman
                    fondling her child and saying:  "You are quiet now, and if the
                    Wolf should come, we will kill him."  The Wolf, hearing these
                    words, went home, gasping with cold and hunger.  When he reached
                    his den, Mistress Wolf inquired of him why he returned wearied
                    and supperless, so contrary to his wont.  He replied:  "Why,
                    forsooth!
                    use I gave credence to the words of a woman!"


                    The and the Horse

                    AN besought a Horse to spare him a small portion of his feed.
                    "Yes," said the Horse; "if any remains out of what I am now
                    eating I will give it you for the sake of my own superior
                    dignity, and if you will come when I reach my own stall in the
                    evening, I will give you a little sack full of barley."  The replied, "Thank you.  But I can't think that you, who refuse me a
                    little matter now.  will by and by confer on me a greater
                    benefit."


                    Truth and the Traveler

                    A WAYFARING MAN, traveling in the desert, met a woman standing
                    alone and terribly dejected.  He inquired of her, "Who art thou?"
                    "My name is Truth," she replied.  "And for what cause," he asked,
                    "have you left the city to dwell alone here in the wilderness?"
                    She made answer, "Because in former times, falsehood was with
                    few, but is now with all men."

                    The Manslayer

                    A MAN committed a murder, and was pursued by the relations of the
                    man whom he murdered.  On his reaching the river Nile he saw a
                    Lion on its bank and being fearfully afraid, climbed up a tree.
                    He found a serpent in the upper branches of the tree, and again
                    being greatly alarmed, he threw himself into the river, where a
                    crocodile caught him and ate him.  Thus the earth, the air, and
                    the water alike refused shelter to a murderer.

                    The Lion and the Fox

                    A FOX entered into partnership with a Lion on the pretense of
                    becoming his servant.  Each undertook his proper duty in
                    accordance with his own nature and powers.  The Fox discovered
                    and pointed out the prey; the Lion sprang on it and seized it.
                    The Fox soon became jealous of the Lion carrying off the Lion's
                    share, and said that he would no longer find out the prey, but
                    would capture it on his own account.  The next day he attempted
                    to snatch a lamb from the fold, but he himself fell prey to the
                    huntsmen and hounds.

                    The Lion and the Eagle

                    AN EAGLE stayed his flight and entreated a Lion to make an
                    alliance with him to their mutual advantage.  The Lion replied,
                    "I have no objection, but you must excuse me for requiring you to
                    find surety for your good faith, for how can I trust anyone as a
                    friend who is able to fly away from his bargain whenever he
                    pleases?'

                    Try before you trust.

                    The Hen and the Swallow

                    A HEN finding the eggs of a viper and carefully keeping them
                    warm, nourished them into life.  A Swallow, observing what she
                    had done, said, "You silly creature! why have you hatched these
                    vipers which, when they shall have grown, will inflict injury on
                    all, beginning with yourself?'

                    The Buffoon and the Countryman

                    A RICH NOBLEMAN once opened the theaters without charge to the
                    people, and gave a public notice that he would handsomely reward
                    any person who invented a new amusement for the occasion.
                    Various public performers contended for the prize.  Among them
                    came a Buffoon well known among the populace for his jokes, and
                    said that he had a kind of entertainment which had never been
                    brought out on any stage before.  This report being spread about
                    made a great stir, and the theater was crowded in every part.
                    The Buffoon appeared alone upon the platform, without any
                    apparatus or confederates, and the very sense of expectation
                    caused an intense silence.  He suddenly bent his head towards his
                    bosom and imitated the squeaking of a little pig so admirably
                    with his voice that the audience declared he had a porker under
                    his cloak, and demanded that it should be shaken out.  When that
                    was done and nothing was found, they cheered the actor, and
                    loaded him with the loudest applause.  A Countryman in the crowd,
                    observing all that has passed, said, "So help me, Hercules, he
                    shall not beat me at that trick!"  and at once proclaimed that he
                    would do the same thing on the next day, though in a much more
                    natural way.  On the morrow a still larger crowd assembled in the
                    theater, but now partiality for their favorite actor very
                    generally prevailed, and the audience came rather to ridicule the
                    Countryman than to see the spectacle.  Both of the performers
                    appeared on the stage.  The Buffoon grunted and squeaked away
                    first, and obtained, as on the preceding day, the applause and
                    cheers of the spectators.  Next the Countryman commenced, and
                    pretending that he concealed a little pig beneath his clothes
                    (which in truth he did, but not suspected by the audience )
                    contrived to take hold of and to pull his ear causing the pig to
                    squeak.  The Crowd, however, cried out with one consent that the
                    Buffoon had given a far more exact imitation, and clamored for
                    the Countryman to be kicked out of the theater.  On this the
                    rustic produced the little pig from his cloak and showed by the
                    most positive proof the greatness of their mistake.  "Look here,"
                    he said, "this shows what sort of judges you are."

                    The Crow and the Serpent

                    A CROW in great want of food saw a Serpent asleep in a sunny
                    nook, and flying down, greedily seized him.  The Serpent, turning
                    about, bit the Crow with a mortal wound.  In the agony of death,
                    the bird exclaimed:  "O unhappy me! who have found in that which I
                    deemed a happy windfall the source of my destruction."

                    The Hunter and the Horseman

                    A CERTAIN HUNTER, having snared a hare, placed it upon his
                    shoulders and set out homewards.  On his way he met a man on
                    horseback who begged the hare of him, under the pretense of
                    purchasing it.  However, when the Horseman got the hare, he rode
                    off as fast as he could.  The Hunter ran after him, as if he was
                    sure of overtaking him, but the Horseman increased more and more
                    the distance between them.  The Hunter, sorely against his will,
                    called out to him and said, "Get along with you! for I will now
                    make you a present of the hare."

                    The King's Son and the Painted Lion

                    A KING, whose only son was fond of martial exercises, had a dream
                    in which he was warned that his son would be killed by a lion.
                    Afraid the dream should prove true, he built for his son a
                    pleasant palace and adorned its walls for his amusement with all
                    kinds of life-sized animals, among which was the picture of a
                    lion.  When the young Prince saw this, his grief at being thus
                    confined burst out afresh, and, standing near the lion, he said:
                    "O you most detestable of animals! through a lying dream of my
                    father's, which he saw in his sleep, I am shut up on your account
                    in this palace as if I had been a girl:  what shall I now do to
                    you?'  With these words he stretched out his hands toward a
                    thorn-tree, meaning to cut a stick from its branches so that he
                    might beat the lion.  But one of the tree's prickles pierced his
                    finger and caused great pain and inflammation, so that the young
                    Prince fell down in a fainting fit.  A violent fever suddenly set
                    in, from which he died not many days later.

                    We had better bear our troubles bravely than try to escape them.


                    The Cat and Venus

                    A CAT fell in love with a handsome young man, and entreated Venus
                    to change her into the form of a woman.  Venus consented to her
                    request and transformed her into a beautiful damsel, so that the
                    youth saw her and loved her, and took her home as his bride.
                    While the two were reclining in their chamber, Venus wishing to
                    discover if the Cat in her change of shape had also altered her
                    habits of life, let down a mouse in the middle of the room.  The
                    Cat, quite forgetting her present condition, started up from the
                    couch and pursued the mouse, wishing to eat it.  Venus was much
                    disappointed and again caused her to return to her former shape.


                    Nature exceeds nurture.


                    The She-Goats and Their Beards

                    THE SHE-GOATS having obtained a beard by request to Jupiter, the
                    He-Goats were sorely displeased and made complaint that the
                    females equaled them in dignity.  "Allow them," said Jupiter, "to
                    enjoy an empty honor and to assume the badge of your nobler sex,
                    so long as they are not your equals in strength or courage."

                    It matters little if those who are inferior to us in merit should
                    be like us in outside appearances.

                    The Camel and the Arab

                    AN ARAB CAMEL-DRIVER, after completing the loading of his Camel,
                    asked him which he would like best, to go up hill or down.  The
                    poor beast replied, not without a touch of reason:  "Why do you
                    ask me? Is it that the level way through the desert is closed?"


                    The Miller, His Son, and Their

                    A MILLER and his son were driving their to a neighboring fair
                    to sell him.  They had not gone far when they met with a troop of
                    women collected round a well, talking and laughing.  "Look
                    there," cried one of them, "did you ever see such fellows, to be
                    trudging along the road on foot when they might ride?'  The old
                    man hearing this, quickly made his son mount the, and
                    continued to walk along merrily by his side.  Presently they came
                    up to a group of old men in earnest debate.  "There," said one of
                    them, "it proves what I was a-saying.  What respect is shown to
                    old age in these days? Do you see that idle lad riding while his
                    old father has to walk? Get down, you young scapegrace, and let
                    the old man rest his weary limbs."  Upon this the old man made his
                    son dismount, and got up himself.  In this manner they had not
                    proceeded far when they met a company of women and children:
                    "Why, you lazy old fellow," cried several tongues at once, "how
                    can you ride upon the beast, while that poor little lad there can
                    hardly keep pace by the side of you?'  The good-natured Miller
                    immediately took up his son behind him.  They had now almost
                    reached the town.    "Pray, honest friend," said a citizen, "is
                    that your own?'  "Yes," replied the old man.  "O, one would
                    not have thought so," said the other, "by the way you load him.
                    Why, you two fellows are better able to carry the poor beast than
                    he you."  "Anything to please you," said the old man; "we can but
                    try."  So, alighting with his son, they tied the legs of the together and with the help of a pole endeavored to carry him on
                    their shoulders over a bridge near the entrance to the town.
                    This entertaining sight brought the people in crowds to laugh at
                    it, till the, not liking the noise nor the strange handling
                    that he was subject to, broke the cords that bound him and,
                    tumbling off the pole, fell into the river.  Upon this, the old
                    man, vexed and ashamed, made the best of his way home again,
                    convinced that by endeavoring to please everybody he had pleased
                    nobody, and lost his in the bargain.

                    The Crow and the Sheep

                    A TROUBLESOME CROW seated herself on the back of a Sheep.  The
                    Sheep, much against his will, carried her backward and forward
                    for a long time, and at last said, "If you had treated a dog in
                    this way, you would have had your deserts from his sharp teeth."
                    To this the Crow replied, "I despise the weak and yield to the
                    strong.  I know whom I may bully and whom I must flatter; and I
                    thus prolong my life to a good old age."

                    The Fox and the Bramble

                    A FOX was mounting a hedge when he lost his footing and caught
                    hold of a Bramble to save himself.  Having pricked and grievously
                    tom the soles of his feet, he accused the Bramble because, when
                    he had fled to her for assistance, she had used him worse than
                    the hedge itself.  The Bramble, interrupting him, said, "But you
                    really must have been out of your senses to fasten yourself on
                    me, who am myself always accustomed to fasten upon others."

                    The Wolf and the Lion

                    A WOLF, having stolen a lamb from a fold, was carrying him off to
                    his lair.  A Lion met him in the path, and seizing the lamb, took
                    it from him.  Standing at a safe distance, the Wolf exclaimed,
                    "You have unrighteously taken that which was mine from me!"  To
                    which the Lion jeeringly replied, "It was righteously yours, eh?
                    The gift of a friend?'

                    The Dog and the Oyster

                    A DOG, used to eating eggs, saw an Oyster and, opening his mouth
                    to its widest extent, swallowed it down with the utmost relish,
                    supposing it to be an egg.  Soon afterwards suffering great pain
                    in his stomach, he said, "I deserve all this torment, for my
                    folly in thinking that everything round must be an egg."

                    They who act without sufficient thought, will often fall into
                    unsuspected danger.

                    The Ant and the Dove

                    AN ANT went to the bank of a river to quench its thirst, and
                    being carried away by the rush of the stream, was on the point of
                    drowning.  A Dove sitting on a tree overhanging the water plucked
                    a leaf and let it fall into the stream close to her.  The Ant
                    climbed onto it and floated in safety to the bank.  Shortly
                    afterwards a birdcatcher came and stood under the tree, and laid
                    his lime-twigs for the Dove, which sat in the branches.  The Ant,
                    perceiving his design, stung him in the foot.  In pain the
                    birdcatcher threw down the twigs, and the noise made the Dove
                    take wing.

                    The Partridge and the Fowler

                    A FOWLER caught a Partridge and was about to kill it.  The
                    Partridge earnestly begged him to spare his life, saying, "Pray,
                    master, permit me to live and I will entice many Partridges to
                    you in recompense for your mercy to me."  The Fowler replied, "I
                    shall now with less scruple take your life, because you are
                    willing to save it at the cost of betraying your friends and
                    relations."

                    The Flea and the Man

                    A MAN, very much annoyed with a Flea, caught him at last, and
                    said, "Who are you who dare to feed on my limbs, and to cost me
                    so much trouble in catching you?'  The Flea replied, "O my dear
                    sir, pray spare my life, and destroy me not, for I cannot
                    possibly do you much harm."  The Man, laughing, replied, "Now you
                    shall certainly die by mine own hands, for no evil, whether it be
                    small or large, ought to be tolerated."

                    The Thieves and the Cock

                    SOME THIEVES broke into a house and found nothing but a Cock,
                    whom they stole, and got off as fast as they could.  Upon
                    arriving at home they prepared to kill the Cock, who thus pleaded
                    for his life:  "Pray spare me; I am very serviceable to men.  I
                    wake them up in the night to their work."  "That is the very
                    reason why we must the more kill you," they replied; "for when
                    you wake your neighbors, you entirely put an end to our
                    business."

                    The safeguards of virtue are hateful to those with evil
                    intentions.

                    The Dog and the Cook

                    A RICH MAN gave a great feast, to which he invited many friends
                    and acquaintances.  His Dog availed himself of the occasion to
                    invite a stranger Dog, a friend of his, saying, "My master gives
                    a feast, and there is always much food remaining; come and sup
                    with me tonight."  The Dog thus invited went at the hour
                    appointed, and seeing the preparations for so grand an
                    entertainment, said in the joy of his heart, "How glad I am that
                    I came! I do not often get such a chance as this.  I will take
                    care and eat enough to last me both today and tomorrow."  While he
                    was congratulating himself and wagging his tail to convey his
                    pleasure to his friend, the Cook saw him moving about among his
                    dishes and, seizing him by his fore and hind paws, bundled him
                    without ceremony out of the window.  He fell with force upon the
                    ground and limped away, howling dreadfully.  His yelling soon
                    attracted other street dogs, who came up to him and inquired how
                    he had enjoyed his supper.  He replied, "Why, to tell you the
                    truth, I drank so much wine that I remember nothing.  I do not
                    know how I got out of the house."

                    The Travelers and the Plane-Tree

                    TWO TRAVELERS, worn out by the heat of the summer's sun, laid
                    themselves down at noon under the widespreading branches of a
                    Plane-Tree.  As they rested under its shade, one of the Travelers
                    said to the other, "What a singularly useless tree is the Plane!
                    It bears no fruit, and is not of the least service to man."  The
                    Plane-Tree, interrupting him, said, "You ungrateful fellows! Do
                    you, while receiving benefits from me and resting under my shade,
                    dare to describe me as useless, and unprofitable?'

                    Some men underrate their best blessings.


                    The Hares and the Frogs

                    THE HARES, oppressed by their own exceeding timidity and weary of
                    the perpetual alarm to which they were exposed, with one accord
                    determined to put an end to themselves and their troubles by
                    jumping from a lofty precipice into a deep lake below.  As they
                    scampered off in large numbers to carry out their resolve, the
                    Frogs lying on the banks of the lake heard the noise of their
                    feet and rushed helter-skelter to the deep water for safety.  On
                    seeing the rapid disappearance of the Frogs, one of the Hares
                    cried out to his companions:  "Stay, my friends, do not do as you
                    intended; for you now see that there are creatures who are still
                    more timid than ourselves."


                    The Lion, Jupiter, and the Elephant

                    THE LION wearied Jupiter with his frequent complaints.  "It is
                    true, O Jupiter!"  he said, "that I am gigantic in strength,
                    handsome in shape, and powerful in attack.  I have jaws well
                    provided with teeth, and feet furnished with claws, and I lord it
                    over all the beasts of the forest, and what a disgrace it is,
                    that being such as I am, I should be frightened by the crowing of
                    a cock."  Jupiter replied, "Why do you blame me without a cause? I
                    have given you all the attributes which I possess myself, and
                    your courage never fails you except in this one instance."  On
                    hearing this the Lion groaned and lamented very much and,
                    reproaching himself with his cowardice, wished that he might die.
                    As these thoughts passed through his mind, he met an Elephant and
                    came close to hold a conversation with him.  After a time he
                    observed that the Elephant shook his ears very often, and he
                    inquired what was the matter and why his ears moved with such a
                    tremor every now and then.  Just at that moment a Gnat settled on
                    the head of the Elephant, and he replied, "Do you see that little
                    buzzing insect? If it enters my ear, my fate is sealed.  I should
                    die presently."  The Lion said, "Well, since so huge a beast is
                    afraid of a tiny gnat, I will no more complain, nor wish myself
                    dead.  I find myself, even as I am, better off than the
                    Elephant."

                    The Lamb and the Wolf

                    A WOLF pursued a Lamb, which fled for refuge to a certain Temple.
                    The Wolf called out to him and said, "The Priest will slay you in
                    sacrifice, if he should catch you."  On which the Lamb replied,
                    "It would be better for me to be sacrificed in the Temple than to
                    be eaten by you."


                    The Rich Man and the Tanner

                    A RICH MAN lived near a Tanner, and not being able to bear the
                    unpleasant smell of the tan-yard, he pressed his neighbor to go
                    away.  The Tanner put off his departure from time to time, saying
                    that he would leave soon.  But as he still continued to stay, as
                    time went on, the rich man became accustomed to the smell, and
                    feeling no manner of inconvenience, made no further complaints.


                    The Shipwrecked Man and the Sea

                    A SHIPWRECKED MAN, having been cast upon a certain shore, slept
                    after his buffetings with the deep.  After a while he awoke, and
                    looking upon the Sea, loaded it with reproaches.  He argued that
                    it enticed men with the calmness of its looks, but when it had
                    induced them to plow its waters, it grew rough and destroyed
                    them.  The Sea, assuming the form of a woman, replied to him:
                    "Blame not me, my good sir, but the winds, for I am by my own
                    nature as calm and firm even as this earth; but the winds
                    suddenly falling on me create these waves, and lash me into
                    fury."


                    The Mules and the Robbers

                    TWO MULES well-laden with packs were trudging along.  One carried
                    panniers filled with money, the other sacks weighted with grain.
                    The Mule carrying the treasure walked with head erect, as if
                    conscious of the value of his burden, and tossed up and down the
                    clear-toned bells fastened to his neck.  His companion followed
                    with quiet and easy step.  All of a sudden Robbers rushed upon
                    them from their hiding-places, and in the scuffle with their
                    owners, wounded with a sword the Mule carrying the treasure,
                    which they greedily seized while taking no notice of the grain.
                    The Mule which had been robbed and wounded bewailed his
                    misfortunes.  The other replied, "I am indeed glad that I was
                    thought so little of, for I have lost nothing, nor am I hurt with
                    any wound."


                    The Viper and the File

                    A LION, entering the workshop of a smith, sought from the tools
                    the means of satisfying his hunger.  He more particularly
                    addressed himself to a File, and asked of him the favor of a
                    meal.  The File replied, "You must indeed be a simple-minded
                    fellow if you expect to get anything from me, who am accustomed
                    to take from everyone, and never to give anything in return."


                    The Lion and the Shepherd

                    A LION, roaming through a forest, trod upon a thorn.  Soon
                    afterward he came up to a Shepherd and fawned upon him, wagging
                    his tail as if to say, "I am a suppliant, and seek your aid."  The
                    Shepherd boldly examined the beast, discovered the thorn, and
                    placing his paw upon his lap, pulled it out; thus relieved of his
                    pain, the Lion returned into the forest.  Some time after, the
                    Shepherd, being imprisoned on a false accusation, was condemned
                    "to be cast to the Lions" as the punishment for his imputed
                    crime.  But when the Lion was released from his cage, he
                    recognized the Shepherd as the man who healed him, and instead of
                    attacking him, approached and placed his foot upon his lap.  The
                    King, as soon as he heard the tale, ordered the Lion to be set
                    free again in the forest, and the Shepherd to be pardoned and
                    restored to his friends.


                    The Camel and Jupiter

                    THE CAMEL, when he saw the Bull adorned with horns, envied him
                    and wished that he himself could obtain the same honors.  He went
                    to Jupiter, and besought him to give him horns.  Jupiter, vexed
                    at his request because he was not satisfied with his size and
                    strength of body, and desired yet more, not only refused to give
                    him horns, but even deprived him of a portion of his ears.


                    The Panther and the Shepherds

                    A PANTHER, by some mischance, fell into a pit.  The Shepherds
                    discovered him, and some threw sticks at him and pelted him with
                    stones, while others, moved with compassion towards one about to
                    die even though no one should hurt him, threw in some food to
                    prolong his life.  At night they returned home, not dreaming of
                    any danger, but supposing that on the morrow they would find him
                    dead.  The Panther, however, when he had recruited his feeble
                    strength, freed himself with a sudden bound from the pit, and
                    hastened to his den with rapid steps.  After a few days he came
                    forth and slaughtered the cattle, and, killing the Shepherds who
                    had attacked him, raged with angry fury.  Then they who had
                    spared his life, fearing for their safety, surrendered to him
                    their flocks and begged only for their lives.  To them the
                    Panther made this reply:  "I remember alike those who sought my
                    life with stones, and those who gave me food
                    aside, therefore, your fears.  I return as an enemy only to those
                    who injured me."


                    The and the Charger

                    AN congratulated a Horse on being so ungrudgingly and
                    carefully provided for, while he himself had scarcely enough to
                    eat and not even that without hard work.  But when war broke out,
                    a heavily armed soldier mounted the Horse, and riding him to the
                    charge, rushed into the very midst of the enemy.  The Horse was
                    wounded and fell dead on the battlefield.  Then the, seeing
                    all these things, changed his mind, and commiserated the Horse.


                    The Eagle and His Captor

                    AN EAGLE was once captured by a man, who immediately clipped his
                    wings and put him into his poultry-yard with the other birds, at
                    which treatment the Eagle was weighed down with grief.  Later,
                    another neighbor purchased him and allowed his feathers to grow
                    again.  The Eagle took flight, and pouncing upon a hare, brought
                    it at once as an offering to his benefactor.  A Fox, seeing this,
                    exclaimed, "Do not cultivate the favor of this man, but of your
                    former owner, lest he should again hunt for you and deprive you a
                    second time of your wings."


                    The Bald Man and the Fly

                    A FLY bit the bare head of a Bald Man who, endeavoring to destroy
                    it, gave himself a heavy slap.  Escaping, the Fly said mockingly,
                    "You who have wished to revenge, even with death, the Prick of a
                    tiny insect, see what you have done to yourself to add insult to
                    injury?'  The Bald Man replied, "I can easily make peace with
                    myself, because I know there was no intention to hurt.  But you,
                    an ill-favored and contemptible insect who delights in sucking
                    human blood, I wish that I could have killed you even if I had
                    incurred a heavier penalty."


                    The Olive-Tree and the Fig-Tree

                    THE OLIVE-TREE ridiculed the Fig-Tree because, while she was
                    green all the year round, the Fig-Tree changed its leaves with
                    the seasons.  A shower of snow fell upon them, and, finding the
                    Olive full of foliage, it settled upon its branches and broke
                    them down with its weight, at once despoiling it of its beauty
                    and killing the tree.  But finding the Fig-Tree denuded of
                    leaves, the snow fell through to the ground, and did not injure
                    it at all.


                    The Eagle and the Kite

                    AN EAGLE, overwhelmed with sorrow, sat upon the branches of a
                    tree in company with a Kite.  "Why," said the Kite, "do I see you
                    with such a rueful look?'  "I seek," she replied, "a mate suitable
                    for me, and am not able to find one."  "Take me," returned the
                    Kite, "I am much stronger than you are."  "Why, are you able to
                    secure the means of living by your plunder?'  "Well, I have often
                    caught and carried away an ostrich in my talons."  The Eagle,
                    persuaded by these words, accepted him as her mate.  Shortly
                    after the nuptials, the Eagle said, "Fly off and bring me back
                    the ostrich you promised me."  The Kite, soaring aloft into the
                    air, brought back the shabbiest possible mouse, stinking from the
                    length of time it had lain about the fields.  "Is this," said the
                    Eagle, "the faithful fulfillment of your promise to me?'  The Kite
                    replied, "That I might attain your royal hand, there is nothing
                    that I would not have promised, however much I knew that I must
                    fail in the performance."


                    The and His Driver

                    AN, being driven along a high road, suddenly started off and
                    bolted to the brink of a deep precipice.  While he was in the act
                    of throwing himself over, his owner seized him by the tail,
                    endeavoring to pull him back.  When the persisted in his
                    effort, the man let him go and said, "Conquer, but conquer to
                    your cost."


                    The Thrush and the Fowler

                    A THRUSH was feeding on a myrtle-tree and did not move from it
                    because its berries were so delicious.  A Fowler observed her
                    staying so long in one spot, and having well bird-limed his
                    reeds, caught her.  The Thrush, being at the point of death,
                    exclaimed, "O foolish creature that I am! For the sake of a
                    little pleasant food I have deprived myself of my life."


                    The Rose and the Amaranth

                    AN AMARANTH planted in a garden near a Rose-Tree, thus addressed
                    it:  "What a lovely flower is the Rose, a favorite alike with Gods
                    and with men.  I envy you your beauty and your perfume."  The Rose
                    replied, "I indeed, dear Amaranth, flourish but for a brief
                    season! If no cruel hand pluck me from my stem, yet I must perish
                    by an early doom.  But thou art immortal and dost never fade, but
                    bloomest for ever in renewed youth."


                    The Frogs' Complaint Against the Sun

                    ONCE UPON A TIME, when the Sun announced his intention to take a
                    wife, the Frogs lifted up their voices in clamor to the sky.
                    Jupiter, disturbed by the noise of their croaking, inquired the
                    cause of their complaint.  One of them said, "The Sun, now while
                    he is single, parches up the marsh, and compels us to die
                    miserably in our arid homes.  What will be our future condition
                    if he should beget other suns?'
